                                                    Modular Invariants for Lattice Polarized K3 Surfaces
                                                                             Adrian Clingher ∗                     Charles F. Doran†
arXiv:math/0602146v1 [math.AG] 7 Feb 2006




                                                                                                October 29, 2018


                                                                                                     Abstract
                                                  We study the class of complex algebraic K3 surfaces admitting an embedding of H ⊕ E8 ⊕ E8 inside the
                                                  Néron-Severi lattice. These special K3 surfaces are classified by a pair of modular invariants, in the same
                                                  manner that elliptic curves over C are classified by the J-invariant. Via the canonical Shioda-Inose structure
                                                  we construct a geometric correspondence relating K3 surfaces of the above type with abelian surfaces
                                                  realized as cartesian products of two elliptic curves. We then use this correspondence to determine explicit
                                                  formulas for the modular invariants.


                                            1 Introduction
                                            Let X be an algebraic K3 surface over the field of complex numbers. The Z-module obtained as the image
                                            of the first Chern class map:
                                                                                   c1 : H1 (X, OX
                                                                                                ∗
                                                                                                  ) → H2 (X, Z),
                                            when endowed with the bilinear pairing induced by the intersection form on H2 (X, Z), forms an even
                                            lattice. By Lefschetz’ Theorem on (1, 1) classes, this is precisely the Néron-Severi lattice NS(X) of the surface
                                            X, namely the group of isomorphism classes of divisors modulo homological equivalence. Furthermore,
                                            according to the Hodge Index Theorem, NS(X) is an indefinite lattice of rank 1 ≤ pX ≤ 20 and signature of
                                            type (1, pX − 1).
                                                In [11], Dolgachev formulated the notion of a lattice polarization of a K3 surface. If M is an even lattice
                                            of signature (1, r) with r ≥ 0, then an M-polarization on X is, by definition, a primitive lattice embedding:

                                                                                                  i : M ֒→ NS(X)                                                   (1)

                                            such that the image i(M) contains a pseudo-ample class. A coarse moduli space MM can be defined for
                                            equivalence classes of pairs (X, i) of M-polarized K3 surfaces and an appropriate version of the Global
                                            Torelli Theorem holds.
                                                The focus of this paper is on K3 surfaces which admit a polarization by the unique even unimodular
                                            lattice of signature (1, 17). This particular lattice can be realized effectively as the orthogonal direct sum

                                                                                                 M = H ⊕ E8 ⊕ E8

                                            where H is the standard rank-two hyperbolic lattice and E8 is the unique even, negative-definite and uni-
                                            modular lattice of rank eight. Note that not all algebraic K3 surfaces admit such an M-polarization. In fact,
                                            the presence of such a structure imposes severe constraints on the geometry of X. In particular, the Picard
                                            rank pX has to be 18, 19 or 20.
                                               A standard observation on the Hodge theory of this special class of K3 surfaces is that the polarized
                                            Hodge structure of an M-polarized K3 surface (X, i) is identical with the polarized Hodge structure of an
                                              ∗ Department of Mathematics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. e-mail: clingher@math.stanford.edu
                                              † Department of Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195. e-mail: doran@math.washington.edu




                                                                                                            1
abelian surface A = E1 × E2 realized as a cartesian product of two elliptic curves. Since both types of
surfaces involved admit appropriate versions of the Torelli theorem, Hodge theory implies a well-defined
correspondence:
                                           (X, i) ↔ E1 × E2                                           (2)
giving rise to a canonical analytic isomorphism between the corresponding moduli spaces on the two sides.
By employing a modern point of view from the frontier of algebraic geometry with string theory, one can
regard (2) as a Hodge-theoretic duality map, a correspondence that relates two seemingly different types
of surfaces sharing similar Hodge-theoretic information1 . Our point in this work is that the resemblance of
the two Hodge structures involved in the duality correspondence (2) is not fortuitous, but rather is merely
a consequence of a quite interesting geometric relationship.
Theorem 1.1. Let (X, i) be an M-polarized K3 surface.
 (a) The surface X possesses a canonical involution β defining a Shioda-Inose structure.
 (b) The minimal resolution of X/β is a new K3 surface Y endowed with a canonical Kummer structure. This struc-
     ture realizes Y as the Kummer surface Km(E1 × E2 ) associated to an abelian surface A canonically represented
     as a cartesian product of two elliptic curves. The elliptic curves E1 and E2 are unique, up to permutation.
 (c) The construction induces a canonical Hodge isomorphism between the M-polarized Hodge structure of X and
     the natural H-polarized Hodge structure of the abelian surface A = E1 × E2 .
Section 3 of the paper is devoted entirely to proving the above theorem.
    In the second part of the paper we describe an application of the geometric transform outlined above.
One important feature of the special class of M-polarized K3 surfaces is that such polarized pairs (X, i) turn
out to be completely classified by two modular invariants π, σ ∈ C, much in the same as way elliptic curves
over the field of complex numbers are classified by the J-invariant. However, the two modular invariants
π and σ are not geometric in origin. They are defined Hodge-theoretically, and the result leading to the
classification is a consequence of the appropriate version of the Global Torelli Theorem for lattice polarized
K3 surfaces. However, in the context of the duality map (2), the two invariants can be seen as the standard
symmetric functions on the J-invariants of the dual elliptic curves:

                                           σ = J(E1 ) + J(E2 ), π = J(E1 ) · J(E2 ).                                                    (3)

This interpretation suggests that the modular invariants of an M-polarized K3 surface can be computed by
determining the two elliptic curves that appear on the right-side of (2).
    Explicit M-polarized K3 surfaces can be constructed by various geometrical procedures. One such
method, introduced in 1977 by Inose [17], constructs a two-parameter family X(a, b) of M-polarized K3
surfaces2 by taking minimal resolutions of the projective quartics in P3 associated with the special equa-
tions:
                                                1 2 2         
                      y 2 zw − 4x3 z + 3axzw2 −    z w + w4 + bzw3 = 0, a, b ∈ C.                          (4)
                                                 2
In fact, as we will see shortly, this family covers all possibilities. Every M-polarized K3 surface can be
realized as X(a, b) for some a, b ∈ C. One can regard the Inose quartic (4) as a normal form of an M-
polarized K3 surface.
    In the second part of the paper, we use the geometric transform of Theorem 1.1 to explicitly describe the
J-invariants of the two elliptic curves E1 and E2 associated to the Inose surface X(a, b).
   1 In fact, the use of this terminology for (2) is quite natural. The identification of Hodge structures given by (2) is a particular case

of a more general Hodge-theoretic phenomenon which, surprisingly, was predicted by physics. In string theory this relationship is
known as the F-Theory/Heterotic String Duality in eight dimensions. We refer the reader to Section 5 for a brief discussion of this
aspect.
   2 An equivalent two-parameter family is known in the physics literature as the Morrison-Vafa family [25].




                                                                     2
Theorem 1.2. The J-invariants J(E1 ) and J(E2 ) of the two elliptic curves associated to X(a, b) by the transform of
Theorem 1.1 are the two solutions of the quadratic equation:
                                                             
                                          x2 − a3 − b2 + 1 x + a3 = 0.

As pointed out earlier, as a consequence of the above theorem, one obtains explicit formulas for the two
modular invariants of the Inose surface X(a, b).
Corollary 1.3. The modular invariants of the Inose surface X(a, b) are given by:

                                                 π = a3 ,     σ = a3 − b2 + 1.                                   (5)

The power of the geometric transformation underlying the duality map (2) is fully revealed by the proof of
Theorem 1.2. In the absence of such a geometric argument, in order to prove that statement one would be
forced to undertake long and very complex computations of the periods of the quartic (4)3 .
    It seems that the geometric transformation described by Theorem 1.1 is a particular case of a more
general phenomenon. Evidence for this is provided by an analysis of the slightly more general case of K3
surfaces polarized by the rank 17 lattice H ⊕ E8 ⊕ E7 . Surfaces in this class still admit a canonical Shioda-
Inose structure. This leads to a correspondence between these special K3 surfaces and jacobians of smooth
genus-two curves. These results will be described in a forthcoming paper.
    A very interesting alternative arithmetic approach to the above questions, by Elkies and Kumar, has
been communicated to the authors [22].


2 Hodge Structures for M-polarized K3 Surfaces
Let (X, i) be an M-polarized K3 surface. Denote by ω ∈ H2 (X, C) the class of a non-zero holomorphic two-
form on X. This class is unique, up to multiplication by a non-zero scalar. The Hodge structure of X is then
essentially given by the decomposition:

                                        H2 (X, C) = H2,0 (X) ⊕ H1,1 (X) ⊕ H0,2 (X)

where H2,0 (X) = C · ω, H0,2 (X) = C · ω̄ and H1,1 (X) = {ω, ω̄}⊥ . Since the lattice i(M) is generated by classes
associated to algebraic cycles, it follows that one has an embedding:

                                                i(M) ⊂ H1,1 (X) ∩ H2 (X, Z).

By standard lattice theory (see, for example, the exposition in [27]), the orthogonal complement N of i(M)
in H2 (X, Z) is an even, unimodular sublattice of signature (2, 2). Hence the lattice N is isometric to the
orthogonal direct sum H ⊕ H of two rank-two hyperbolic lattices. One can therefore choose a basis

                                                      B = {x1 , x2 , y1 , y2 }

of N with intersection matrix:                                             
                                                        0     0       1   0
                                                       0     0       0   1 
                                                                           .
                                                       1     0       0   0 
                                                        0     1       0   0
It follows that ω belongs to N ⊗ C. Moreover, since the elements of the basis B are isotropic, the class ω
has non-zero intersection with any one of them. The class ω is therefore uniquely defined as soon as one
imposes the normalization condition (ω, y2 ) = 1.
  3 Such an approach via period computations have been taken in the physics literature [3, 6].




                                                                  3
   Let us also note that the basis B can be chosen such that the isomorphism of real vector spaces:
                                                  (ω, ·) : hx1 , x2 i ⊗ R → C                                  (6)
is orientation reversing. Then, as discussed in [9], the Hodge-Riemann bilinear relations imply that the
normalized period class can be written:
                                              ω = τ x1 + x2 + uy1 + (−τ u)y2                                   (7)
where τ, u are uniquely defined (but depending on the choice of basis B) elements of the complex upper
half-plane H.
Definition 2.1. The modular invariants of the M-polarized K3 surface (X, i) are, by definition:
                                                   σ(X, i) := J(τ ) + J(u),                                    (8)
                                                    π(X, i) := J(τ ) · J(u)
where J is the classical elliptic modular function4 .
Let us make two observations justifying the importance of the numbers defined above. Firstly, the numbers
σ(X, i) and π(X, i) do not depend on the choice of basis B. That is because any new choice of basis B ′ can
be related to B by an integral isometry ϕ of the lattice N that preserves the spinor norm. That is B ′ = ϕ(B).
But then, as shown for example in Section 2 of [15], the group O+ (N) of such integral isometries is naturally
isomorphic to the semi-direct product:
                                             (PSL(2, Z) × PSL(2, Z)) ⋊ Z/2Z
with the generator of Z/2Z acting on PSL(2, Z)×PSL(2, Z) by exchanging the two sides. This clearly proves
that such a modification does not affect σ(X, i) and π(X, i).
    Secondly, thanks to a lattice polarized version of the Global Torelli Theorem for K3 surfaces [11], the
numbers σ(X, i) and π(X, i) fully classify the polarized pairs (X, i) up to isomorphism. Simply put, this
result says that there exists a two-dimensional complex analytic space MM realizing a coarse moduli space
for M-polarized K3 surfaces and that the period map to the classifying space of polarized Hodge structures
is an isomorphism of analytic spaces.
                               MM −→ (PSL(2, Z) × PSL(2, Z)) ⋊ Z/2Z \ (H × H) .                                (9)
From this point of view, the modular invariants σ and π can be regarded as natural coordinates on the
moduli space MM .
    Note then that the right-hand side space in (9) also classifies unordered pairs (E1 , E2 ) of curves of genus
one. The two geometric structures, M-polarized K3 surfaces and unordered pairs of elliptic curves, have
the same classifying moduli space. Moreover, there is an obvious Hodge-theoretic bijective correspondence
relating these structures:
                                            (X, i) ←→ (E1 , E2 )                                              (10)
such that σ(X, i) = J(E1 ) + J(E2 ) and π(X, i) = J(E1 ) · J(E2 ).


3 A Geometric Transformation Underlying the Duality Map
As mentioned in the introduction, our goal is to place the the Hodge theoretic correspondence (10) into a
geometric setting. In what follows, we provide the details needed for both the statement of Theorem 1.3 as
well as its proof. Setting-up the geometric transformation requires a few technical ingredients concerning
Shioda-Inose structures, Kummer surfaces and elliptic fibrations on a K3 surface. We shall therefore begin
our exposition by presenting some basic facts.
                                                           2πi
  4 The function J is normalized such that J(i) = 1 and J(e 3    ) = 0.


                                                                   4
3.1 Shioda-Inose Structures
The notion of a Shioda-Inose structure originates in the works [18] of Shioda and Inose and [27] of Nikulin.
Their ideas were later refined and generalized by Morrison [24]. The above three papers are the main
references for the assertions we review here.
Definition 3.1. Let X be a K3 surface. An involution ϕ ∈ Aut(X) is called a Nikulin involution if ϕ∗ ω = ω for
any holomorphic two-form ω.
If a Nikulin involution ϕ exists on X, then ϕ has exactly eight fixed points. In such a case, the quotient space
                                                     X/{idX , ϕ}
is a surface with eight rational double point singularities of type A1 . The minimal resolution of this singular
space is a new K3 surface which we denote by Y. The two K3 surfaces X and Y are related by a (generically)
two-to-one rational map π : X −→ Y.
    Denote by H2Y the orthogonal complement in H2 (Y, Z) of the eight exceptional curves. One has then a
natural push-forward map (see § 3 of [24] or § 3 of [18]):
                                               π∗ : H2 (X, Z) → H2Y
which restricts to a morphism of Z-modules:
                                                   π∗ : TX → TY                                             (11)
between the transcendental lattices of the two K3 surfaces.
Remark 3.2. The complexification of the morphism (11) is a morphism of Hodge structures, but, in general, (11)
does not preserve the lattice pairings. In fact, one can check that:
                              h π∗ (t1 ), π∗ (t2 ) iY = h t1 , t2 iX + h t1 , ϕ∗ (t2 ) iX .
Definition 3.3. A Nikulin involution ϕ defines a Shioda-Inose structure on X if Y is a Kummer surface and the
morphism (11) is a Hodge isometry TX (2) ≃ TY .
The notation TX (2) means that the bilinear pairing on the transcendental lattice TX is multiplied by 2.
We refer the reader to section 3.4 for an explanation of the significance of the last condition in the above
definition, as well as for a short overview of the basics of Kummer surfaces.
    Not every K3 surface admits a Nikulin involution, much less a Shioda-Inose structure. A very effective
lattice-theoretic criterion which provides a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a Shioda-
Inose structure on a K3 surface X has been given by Morrison.
Theorem 3.4. (Morrison [24], Theorem 5.7) Let X be an algebraic K3 surface. There exists a Shioda-Inose structure
on X if and only if the lattice E8 ⊕ E8 can be primitively embedded into the Néron-Severi lattice NS(X).
The proof of the above statement is based on a result of Nikulin ([27], Theorem 4.3). A primitive embedding
E8 ⊕ E8 ֒→ NS(X) allows one to define a special lattice isometry of H2 (X, Z) which interchanges the two
copies of E8 given by the embedding and acts trivially on their orthogonal complement. In this context,
Nikulin’s theorem asserts that, possibly after conjugation by a reflection in an algebraic class of square −2,
this lattice isometry can be associated to an involution of the K3 surface X. Morrison shows then that this
involution defines in fact a Shioda-Inose structure on X.
    Closer to the purpose of this paper, note that Theorem 3.4 implies that an M-polarized K3 surface (X, i)
admits a Shioda-Inose structure. In fact, there exists a well-defined Shioda-Inose structure β on X canoni-
cally associated with the M-polarization.
    This canonical Shioda-Inose structure associated to an M-polarized K3 surface plays a central role in our
construction. However, in this paper we shall take a different point of view towards defining the Nikulin
involution β underlying the Shioda-Inose structure. Instead of using Theorem 3.4, we shall introduce this
involution in a more explicit and geometric manner. The canonical involution β appears naturally in the
context of a special jacobian fibration on X.

                                                           5
3.2 Jacobian Fibrations on K3 Surfaces
During the course of this section we shall assume that X is an algebraic K3 surface.
Definition 3.5. A jacobian fibration (or elliptic fibration with section) on X is a pair (ϕ, S) consisting of a proper
map of analytic spaces ϕ : X → P1 whose generic fiber is a smooth curve of genus one, and a section S in the elliptic
fibration ϕ.
If S ′ is another section of the jacobian fibration (ϕ, S), then there exists5 an automorphism of X preserving
ϕ and mapping S to S ′ . One can therefore realize an identification between the set of sections of ϕ and
the group of automorphisms of X preserving ϕ. This is the Mordell-Weil group MW(ϕ, S) of the jacobian
fibration.
    Note also that a jacobian fibration (ϕ, S) on X induces a sublattice:

                                                            H(ϕ,S) ⊂ NS(X)

constructed as the span of the two cohomology classes associated with the elliptic fiber and the section,
respectively. The lattice H(ϕ,S) is isomorphic to the standard rank-two hyperbolic lattice H.
    The sublattice H(ϕ,S) determines uniquely the jacobian fibration (ϕ, S). In other words, there cannot be
two distinct jacobian fibrations on X determining the same hyperbolic sublattice in NS(X). However, it is
not true that any lattice embedding of H into NS(X) corresponds to a jacobian fibration. Nevertheless, the
following assertions hold:
Lemma 3.6. A lattice embedding H ֒→ NS(X) can be associated with a jacobian fibration (ϕ, S) if and only if its
image in NS(X) contains a pseudo-ample class.
Lemma 3.7. Let ΓX be the group of isometries of H2 (X, Z) preserving the Hodge decomposition. For any lattice
embedding
                                             e : H ֒→ NS(X),
there exists α ∈ ΓX such that Im(α ◦ e) contains a pseudo-ample class.
Lemma 3.8. One has the following bijective correspondence:
                             (                                 )               (                     )
                                  isomorphism classes of           o       /       lattice embeddings / ΓX .     (12)
                                 jacobian fibrations on X                             H ֒→ NS(X)

These are standard well-known results. For proofs, we refer the reader to [30], [21] and [9].
   Next, let us consider
                                           W(ϕ,S) ⊂ NS(X)
to be the orthogonal complement of H(ϕ,S) in the Néron-Severi lattice of X. It follows that W(ϕ,S) itself is
a negative-definite lattice of rank pX − 2. Moreover, the Néron-Severi lattice decomposes as an orthogonal
direct sum:
                                         NS(X) = H(ϕ,S) ⊕ W(ϕ,S) .
Let Σ ⊂ P1 be the set of points on the base of the elliptic fibration ϕ which correspond to singular fibers.
For each v ∈ Σ, denote by Tv the sublattice of W(ϕ,S) spanned by the classes of the irreducible components
of the singular fiber over v which are disjoint from S. One has then the following result.
Lemma 3.9.
 (a) For each v ∈ Σ, Tv is a negative-definite lattice of ADE type.
  5 See, for instance, Chapter 1 of [12] for a proof of this result.




                                                                       6
          root
 (b) Let W(ϕ,S) be the lattice spanned by the roots6 of W(ϕ,S) . Then:
                                                                         M
                                                            root
                                                           W(ϕ,S) =            Tv .                                  (13)
                                                                         v∈Σ

     The decomposition (13) is unique, up to a permutation of the factors.
 (c) There exists a canonical group isomorphism:
                                                              root       ≃
                                                     W(ϕ,S) /W(ϕ,S) −→ MW(ϕ).                                        (14)

The first two statements of the above lemma are standard facts from Kodaira’s classification of singular
fibers of elliptic fibrations (see, for example, [20]). The last statement is due to Shioda [33].
    Let us briefly indicate the construction of the correspondence in (14). Given γ ∈ W(ϕ,S) , denote by L the
unique holomorphic line bundle over X such that c1 (L) = γ. Let x ∈ X be a point belonging to a smooth
fiber Eϕ(x) . Then, the restriction of L to Eϕ(x) is a holomorphic line bundle of degree zero and, therefore,
there exists a unique y ∈ Eϕ(x) such that:

                                                    L|Eϕ(x) ≃ OEϕ(x) (x − y).

The assignment x 7→ y extends by continuity to an automorphism of the K3 surface and hence to an element
in MW(ϕ).

3.3 A Canonical Involution
We shall apply now the general theory presented in the previous section in the context of an M-polarized
K3 surface (X, i).
   By standard lattice theory (see, for example, [27]), there are exactly two distinct ways (up to an overall
isometry) in which one can embed the standard rank-two hyperbolic lattice H isometrically into M. The two
possibilities are distinguished by the isomorphism type of the orthogonal complement of the image of the
embedding. The orthogonal complement has rank 16 and it is also unimodular, even, and negative-definite.
As is well-known, up to isomorphism there exist only two such lattices. One is E8 ⊕ E8 and the other is the
Barnes-Wall lattice D+ 16 .
   In the presence of an M-polarization on X, the two distinct isometric embeddings of the rank-two hy-
perbolic lattice H into M determine two distinct classes of embeddings of H into the Néron-Severi lattice
NS(X). According to Lemma 3.8, one obtains therefore two special jacobian fibrations (Θ1 , S1 ) and (Θ2 , S2 )
on X.
                                             Θ 1 , Θ 2 : X → P1 .
We shall use the term standard fibration for Θ1 (associated to the rank-sixteen lattice E8 ⊕ E8 ) and alternate
fibration for Θ2 (associated to the rank-sixteen lattice D+
                                                          16 ).

Proposition 3.10. Let (X, i) be an M-polarized K3 surface.
 (a) The standard fibration (Θ1 , S1 ) has two singular fibers of Kodaira type II∗ . The section S1 is the unique section
     of Θ1 whose cohomology class belongs to i(M).
 (b) The alternate fibration (Θ2 , S2 ) has a singular fiber of type I∗12 . There are precisely two sections S2 and S2′ of
     Θ2 with cohomology classes represented in i(M). S2 and S2′ are disjoint. Moreover, the Mordell-Weil group
     MW(Θ2 ) contains a canonical involution β ∈ Aut(X) which exchanges S2 and S2′ .
  6 A root of NS(X) is an algebraic class of self-intersection −2.




                                                                     7
Proof. The above assertions are consequences of the general principles reviewed in Section 3.2. In the case
of the standard fibration (Θ1 , S1 ), one has an orthogonal decomposition:
                                                root
                                               W(Θ 1 ,S1 )
                                                           = E8 ⊕ E8 ⊕ U root

where U is the orthogonal complement of i(M) in NS(X) and U root is the root lattice of U. The above
decomposition, combined with assertion (b) of Lemma 3.9, proves the existence of two singular fibers of
Kodaira type II∗ in the elliptic fibration Θ1 . It also follows immediately that S1 is the unique section of Θ1
with associated cohomology class in i(M). One can represent the rational curves obtained as irreducible
components of the two II∗ fibers of Θ1 as well as the section S1 in the following dual diagram.

      C1
      •
            C2
             •
                                                                                                           D2
                                                                                                           •
                                                                                                                D1
                                                                                                                •    (15)
                 >>
                   >
                       C3     C5   C6    C7    C8      C9    S1       D9   D8    D7   D6   D5   D3
                       •      •     •     •     •      •     •        •    •     •    •    •    •    >>
                                                                                                       >
            C4                                                                                             D4
             •                                                                                             •


   The case of the alternate fibration (Θ2 , S2 ) can be handled similarly. In this situation, one obtains an
orthogonal decomposition:
                                            W(Θ2 ,S2 ) = D+16 ⊕ U.

Since any given root of the above lattice has to lie in one of the two factors, one obtains:
                                                     root
                                                    W(Θ 2 ,S)
                                                              = D16 ⊕ U root .

Once more, the assertion (b) of Lemma 3.9 tells one that Θ2 has a singular fiber of type I∗12 . Next, note that,
by assertion (c) of Lemma 3.9, one has an isomorphism of groups:

                                              MW(Θ2 ) ≃ Z/2Z ⊕ V/V root .                                            (16)

The image β ∈ MW(Θ2 ) of the generator of the Z/2Z factor above determines naturally a non-trivial canon-
ical involution of the K3 surface X. In particular, the jacobian fibration (Θ2 , S2 ) has an extra section S2′ , the
image of S2 through β. One can easily see from (16) that S2 and S2′ are the only sections of the elliptic
fibration Θ2 with cohomology classes represented in the polarizing lattice i(M).
    In fact, one can clearly see the special I∗12 singular fiber together with two sections in the dual diagram
(15). This special singular fiber of Θ2 is given by the divisor:

                            C2 + C4 + 2 (C3 + C4 + · · · C9 + S + D9 + D8 + · · · D3 ) + D4 + D2 .

whereas the two sections S2 and S2′ are represented by the two extremal curves C1 and D1 .

Remark 3.11. The effect of the involution β on the diagram (15) amounts to a right-left flip which sends the C-curves
to the corresponding symmetric D-curves and vice-versa. In particular, the restriction of β to the middle rational curve
S is a non-trivial involution of S with two distinct fixed points.
Remark 3.12. The induced morphism β ∗ : H2 (X, Z) → H2 (X, Z) restricts to the identity on the orthogonal comple-
ment of i(M). In particular, β ∗ acts trivially on the transcendental lattice TX .
One may guess now that it is the canonical involution β of Proposition 3.10 that gives rise to the canonical
Shioda-Inose structure on X we mentioned at the end of Section 3.1.




                                                                  8
    We are now in position to formulate the main result of the paper:
Theorem 3.13. Let (X, i) be an M-polarized K3 surface.
 (a) The involution β introduced above defines a Shioda-Inose structure on X.
 (b) The minimal resolution Y of the quotient X/β is a K3 surface with a canonical Kummer structure. This structure
     realizes Y as the Kummer surface of an abelian surface A = E1 × E2 canonically represented as a cartesian
     product of two elliptic curves. The two elliptic curves are unique, up to permutation.
 (d) The above geometric transformation induces a canonical Hodge isomorphism between the M-polarized Hodge
     structure of X and the natural H-polarized Hodge structure of A.
Before embarking on the proof of the above theorem, let us comment briefly on the two special jacobian
fibrations Θ1 and Θ2 which we have uncovered in this section. These two jacobian fibrations7 are canoni-
cally associated to an M-polarization on a K3 surface X. However, so far, it is the standard fibration Θ1 that
has received the lion’s share of attention in the literature8 . An analysis of Θ1 appears in the original work
of Inose [17] and, over the last ten years, Θ1 has been extensively studied in the string theory literature due
to its connection with the E8 ⊕ E8 heterotic string theory in eight dimensions. The alternate fibration Θ2 ,
however, has been largely overlooked. Nevertheless, it is Θ2 , with its non-trivial Mordell-Weil group, that
gives rise to a canonical Shioda-Inose structure on the M-polarized K3 surface X and leads one to a geomet-
ric explanation for the Hodge-theoretic duality map (10). The alternate fibration Θ2 will play a central role
in the remainder of this paper.

3.4 Kummer Surfaces
In order to give a proof of Theorem 3.13, we shall need a few classical results concerning the geometry of
Kummer surfaces. For detailed proofs of the facts mentioned in this brief review we refer the reader to [26],
[30] and [24].
    Let A be a two-dimensional complex torus. Such a surface is naturally endowed with an abelian group
structure. One can consider therefore on A the special involution given by −id. The fixed locus of −id
consists of sixteen distinct points. Therefore the quotient:
                                                              A/{±id}                                                              (17)
is a singular surface with sixteen rational double point singularities of type A1 . It is well-known that the
minimal resolution of (17) is a special K3 surface Km(A) called the Kummer surface of A.
    As a first important feature of Kummer surfaces, we note that the Hodge structures of A and Km(A)
are closely related. Indeed, denote by p : A → Km(A) the rational map induced by the quotienting and
resolution procedure described above. Then, as explained for example in [24], one has a natural morphism
                                                     p∗ : H2 (A, Z) → H2Km(A)

where H2Km(A) is the sublattice of H2 (Km(A), Z) of classes orthogonal to all the sixteen exceptional curves.
The complexification of p∗ sends the class of a holomorphic two-form on A to a class representing a holo-
morphic two-form on Km(A) and, as an immediate consequence of Proposition 3.2 in [24], one obtains:
Proposition 3.14. The map p∗ is an isomorphism and it induces a canonical Hodge isometry
                                                                       p∗
                                                    H2 (A, Z)(2) ≃ H2Km(A) .                                                       (18)
Moreover, p∗ (TA ) = TKm(A) and the above identification leads to a Hodge isometry at the level of transcendental
lattices:                                            p∗
                                            TA (2) ≃ TKm(A) .                                                (19)
   7 There is also an interesting toric reinterpretation of Θ and Θ . They are induced from toric fibrations on a particular toric Fano
                                                             1      2
three-fold by restriction to the anti-canonical hypersurface. These two toric fibrations are beautifully illustrated in Figure 1 of [5].
   8 This is also the reason why we decided to use the terms standard for Θ and alternate for Θ .
                                                                            1                    2



                                                                   9
Kummer surfaces represent a large class of K3 surfaces. In fact, it is known (see for example [30]) that they
form a dense subset in the moduli space of K3 surfaces. One would therefore like to have a criterion
for determining whether a given K3 surface is Kummer. A very effective lattice-theoretic criterion for
answering this question has been introduced by Nikulin in [26].
Definition 3.15. Let
                                                           16
                                                           M
                                                    R =           Zxi                                           (20)
                                                            i=1

be the rank-sixteen even lattice with bilinear form defined by (xi , xj ) = −2δij . By definition, the Kummer lattice
K is the lattice in R ⊗ Q spanned (over Z) by:
                                                                              16
                                                                           1X
                                      x1 , x2 , x3 , · · · , x16 and d =         xi ,
                                                                           2 i=1

The Kummer lattice K has rank sixteen, is even and negative-definite, and has the same discriminant group
and discriminant form as the orthogonal sum:

                                                 H(2) ⊕ H(2) ⊕ H(2)

where H is the standard rank-two hyperbolic lattice.
  For any Kummer surface Km(A), one has a natural primitive lattice embedding:

                                                 K ֒→ NS (Km(A))

whose image is the minimal primitive sublattice of NS (Km(A)) containing the classes of the sixteen excep-
tional curves. Nikulin’s criterion asserts that the converse of the above statement is also true.
Theorem 3.16. (Nikulin [26])
 (a) A K3 surface Y is a Kummer surface if and only if there exists a primitive lattice embedding K ֒→ NS(Y).
 (b) For every primitive lattice embedding e : K ֒→ NS(Y), there exists an unique and canonically defined two-
     dimensional complex torus A and a Hodge isometry α of H2 (Y, Z) such that Y = Km(A) and Im(α ◦ e) is the
     minimal primitive sublattice of NS(Y) containing the sixteen exceptional curves arising during the Kummer
     construction process.
It is possible for a K3 surface Y to have multiple non-equivalent Kummer structures, i.e. there exist non-
isomorphic complex tori A and A′ such that

                                              Km(A) ≃ Y ≃ Km(A′ ).

However, as the last part of Theorem 3.16 illustrates, once a primitive lattice embedding of the Kummer
lattice K into NS(Y) is fixed, there exists a unique complex torus A compatible with the embedding of K.
For a detailed treatment of the classification problem for Kummer structures on a K3 surface we refer the
reader to the paper [16] of Hosono, Lian, Oguiso and Yau.
    For the remainder of this section we shall restrict our attention to Kummer surfaces Km(A) associated
to abelian surfaces A = E1 × E2 realized as a cartesian product of two elliptic curves.
    Let us first introduce the basic criterion for an abelian surface A to have the above property. According
to the Hodge index theorem, the Néron-Severi lattice of A, denoted by NS(A), is an even lattice of signature
(1, r) with 0 ≤ r ≤ 3. If A splits as a cartesian product E1 × E2 of two elliptic curves, then the cohomology
classes of the two curves E1 and E2 span a rank-two hyperbolic sublattice of NS(A). The converse of this
statement also holds.



                                                           10
Proposition 3.17. Let A be an abelian surface.
 (a) The surface A can be realized as a product of two elliptic curves if and only if there exists a primitive lattice
     embedding H ֒→ NS(A).
 (b) For every primitive lattice embedding e : H ֒→ NS(A), there exist two elliptic curves E1 and E2 (unique, up to
     permutation) and an analytic isomorphism A ≃ E1 × E2 such that Im(e) is spanned by the cohomology classes
     of E1 and E2 .
Proof. This is a lattice-theoretic version of Ruppert’s criterion for an abelian surface to be isomorphic to a
cartesian product of two elliptic curves. See [31] or Chapter 10 § 6 of [4] for proofs.

Note that it is possible for an abelian surface A to be represented as a cartesian product of two elliptic curves
in two or more non-equivalent ways. One can see that this phenomenon happens only when the Picard rank
of A is maximal (pA = 4). In such a case, the number of non-equivalent representations A = E1 × E2 has an
interesting interpretation in the context of the class group theory of imaginary quadratic fields [15].
    Let us assume now that a splitting A = E1 × E2 has been fixed. In this context, the cartesian product
structure of A gives rise to a special configuration of twenty-four curves on the Kummer surface Km(A). In
order to introduce this curve configuration, let {x0 , x1 , x2 , x3 } and {y0 , y1 , y2 , y3 } be the two sets of points
of order two on E1 and E2 . Denote by Hi , Gj (0 ≤ i, j ≤ 3) the rational curves on Km(A) obtained as
proper transforms of E1 × {yi } and {xj } × E2 , respectively. Let also Eij be the exceptional curve on Km(A)
associated to the double point (xi , yj ) of A. One has then the following intersection numbers:
                                                        Hi · Gj = 0

                                           Hk · Eij = δki , Gk · Eij = δkj .
Definition 3.18. The configuration of twenty-four rational curves
                                             {Hi , Gj , Eij | 0 ≤ i, j ≤ 3}                                        (21)
is called the double Kummer pencil of Km(A). The minimal primitive sublattice NS (Km(A)) containing the
classes of the curves in (21) is called the double Kummer lattice of Km(A). We denote the isomorphism class of
this lattice by DK.
Remark 3.19. By standard lattice theory, up to an overall isometry, the double Kummer lattice DK has a unique
primitive embedding into the K3 lattice. The orthogonal complement of any such embedding is isomorphic to
                                                    H(2) ⊕ H(2).
Let us also note that the double Kummer lattice DK contains a natural finite-index sublattice isomorphic to
                                                        K ⊕ H(2).
The left-hand side term above is, of course, the minimal primitive sublattice of NS (Km(A)) containing the
sixteen exceptional curves Eij whereas the factor on the right-hand side is spanned by the two classes:
                                                  3
                                                  X                   3
                                                                      X
                                          2Hi +         Eij , 2Gj +         Eij .                                  (22)
                                                  j=0                 i=0

The two classes described above do not depend on the indices i and j, respectively. Moreover, one can
verify that the two classes of (22) are precisely the images of the cohomology classes in H2 (A, Z) associated
to E1 and E2 under the morphism π∗ of Proposition 3.14.
    To summarize, we have seen that every Kummer surface Z = Km(E1 × E2 ) associated to an abelian
surface that can be realized as a cartesian product of two genus-one curves comes equipped with a natural
primitive lattice embedding DK ֒→ NS(Z). In fact, one can see that the existence of such an embedding is a
sufficient criterion for a K3 surface Z to be a Kummer surface associated to a product abelian surface.

                                                            11
Proposition 3.20. Let Z be a K3 surface. Assume that a primitive lattice embedding e : DK ֒→ NS(Z) has been
given. Then there exist two elliptic curves E1 and E2 and a Hodge isometry α of H2 (Z, Z) such that

                                                  Z = Km(E1 × E2 )

and Im(α ◦ e) is the double Kummer lattice associated to the Kummer construction. The two elliptic curves E1 and
E2 are unique (up to permutation) and canonically defined.
Proof. The above assertion is a consequence of the results presented earlier in this section. Let

                                                   e : DK ֒→ NS(Z)

be a primitive lattice embedding. By standard lattice theory, there exists a primitive embedding of the
Kummer lattice K in e(DK). Moreover, this embedding is unique, up to an overall Hodge isometry of
H2 (Z, Z). Therefore, by Nikulin’s criterion, one has a canonical Kummer structure on Z. In other words
Z = Km(A) with A uniquely defined. Then, according to Proposition 3.14, one has a Hodge isometry
                                                                   p∗
                                                 H2 (A, Z)(2) ≃ H2Z .                                                (23)

But H2Z contains a canonical primitive sublattice of type H(2), the orthogonal complement of the Kummer
lattice in e(DK). The preimage of this lattice in H2 (A, Z) is primitively embedded in NS(A) and is iso-
morphic to H. Then, by Proposition 3.17, the abelian surface splits canonically as a product of two elliptic
curves.


3.5 Proof of Theorem 3.13
We are now in position to give detailed proofs for the statements of Theorem 3.13.
   Let us begin by observing that β is a Nikulin involution. If ω is a given holomorphic two-form on X,
then either β ∗ ω = ω or β ∗ ω = −ω. But, the latter possibility implies (see, for example, [36]) that either β has
no fixed locus (case that is ruled out by Remark 3.11) or that the fixed locus of β is a union of curves (case
that is ruled out by the fact that β acts without fixed points on the smooth fibers of Θ2 ). Therefore the only
possibility that can occur is β ∗ ω = ω which, by definition, means that β is a Nikulin involution.
Remark 3.21. As is well-known (for a proof of this fact see §5 of [28]), the fixed locus of a Nikulin involution always
consists of eight distinct points. The eight fixed points associated to β appear nicely in the context of the alternate
fibration Θ2 . As noted in Remark 3.11, two of them lie on the smooth rational curve S (the middle curve of the dual
diagram (15), also the section of the standard fibration Θ1 ). The additional six fixed points lie on the singular fibers
of Θ2 . For instance, in the generic case, the alternate elliptic fibration Θ2 has, in addition to the I∗12 fiber, another
six singular fibers of Kodaira type I1 (each consisting of a reduced rational curve with one node). The extra six fixed
points of β are precisely the nodes of those fibers.
Let then Y be the K3 surface obtained as the minimal resolution of the quotient of X through β. We show
now that Y is a Kummer surface. In order to carry out our argument, we denote by F1 , F2 · · · F8 the eight
exceptional curves arising after resolving the eight rational singularities. Assume that F1 and F2 are asso-
ciated to the two fixed points of β that lie on the I∗12 fiber of Θ2 .
    Recall that the alternate elliptic fibration Θ2 is left invariant by the involution β. Therefore, Θ2 induces
a new elliptic fibration on Y. We denote this fibration by Ψ2 .

                                                   _ _ _ _π _ _ _/ Y
                                                  X@                                                                 (24)
                                                     @@                 ~
                                                       @@            ~~~
                                                    Θ2 @@           ~
                                                                 ~~~ Ψ2
                                                            P1



                                                            12
It is then not hard to see that the I∗12 fiber of Θ2 becomes a singular fiber of Kodaira type I∗6 in the fibration
Ψ2 . We represent its irreducible components in the dual diagram below.

                          R2
                          •
                                                                                                                      F1
                                                                                                                      •           (25)
                               ==                                                                                 
                                 ==                                                                             
                                   =                                                                          
                                       R3          R5         R6        R7          R8        R9        e
                                                                                                        S 1
                                       •           •           •         •          •         •         •     ==
                                                                                                               ==
                                                                                                               =
                               
                          R4                                                                                          F2
                          •                                                                                           •


The curves Ri , 1 ≤ i ≤ 9 are the images of the curves Ci (and also Di ) of X (recall diagram (15)). The curve
Se1 above is the quotient of the rational curve S1 of diagram (15) by the involution β. Note also that R1
is a section in Ψ2 while the unaccounted for exceptional curves F3 , F4 · · · F8 are disjoint from R1 and form
irreducible components in the additional singular fibers of Ψ2 .

                     R1
                      •
                                R2
                                •
                                                                                                                             F1
                                                                                                                             •    (26)
                                     ==                                                                                  
                                       ==                                                                              
                                         =                                                                           
                                             R3          R5        R6          R7        R8        R9          e
                                                                                                               S 1
                                             •            •         •          •          •         •          •     ==
                                                                                                                      ==
                                                                                                                      =
                                     
                                R4                                                                                           F2
                                •                                                                                            •


                                             F3
                                             •
                                                         F4
                                                          •
                                                                   F5
                                                                    •
                                                                               F6
                                                                               •
                                                                                         F7
                                                                                         •
                                                                                                   F8
                                                                                                   •                              (27)

Lemma 3.22. Let L(Y) be the minimal primitive sublattice of NS(Y) containing the classes associated to the eighteen
curves Ri (1 ≤ i ≤ 9), Fj (1 ≤ j ≤ 8) and Se1 . The lattice L(Y) is isomorphic to the double Kummer lattice DK.
Proof. Let us denote by N the minimal primitive sublattice of NS(Y) containing the eight exceptional curves
Fi , 1 ≤ i ≤ 8. The lattice N can also be regarded as the span of the nine classes
                                                                                    8
                                                                               1 X
                                                        F1 , F2 , · · · F8 ,         Fi .
                                                                               2 i=1

This is the so-called Nikulin lattice (see §5 of [24]). It has rank eight and has the same discriminant group
and discriminant form as H(2) ⊕ H(2) ⊕ H(2).
   Denote by H2Y the orthogonal complement of N in H2 (Y, Z). Then, as we described in Section 3.1, the
Shioda-Inose construction induces a natural push-forward morphism:

                                                  π∗ : H2 (X, Z) → H2Y ֒→ H2 (Y, Z).

Adopting the notation of diagram (15), one has that π∗ (S1 ) = 2Se1 + F1 + F2 and π∗ (Cj ) = π∗ (Dj ) = Rj for
1 ≤ j ≤ 9. In particular, the image under π∗ of the class of the elliptic fiber of the standard fibration Θ1 on
X is:
                          2R1 + 4R2 + 6R3 + 3R4 + 5R5 + 4R6 + 3R7 + 2R8 + R9 .                             (28)
We consider then the following sublattices of H2Y :
 (a) E is the span of the curves Rj , 1 ≤ j ≤ 8.
 (b) H is the span of π∗ (S1 ) and (28).
                    
 (c) Q = π∗ i(M)⊥ .


                                                                        13
Using Remarks 3.2 and 3.12, we deduce that the three lattices above are orthogonal to each other. Moreover,
E is isomorphic to E8 (hence unimodular), H is isomorphic to H(2) and Q is isomorphic to H(2) ⊕ H(2).
Hence, the discriminant of E ⊕ H ⊕ Q is 26 . But the lattice H2Y has the same discriminant as its orthogonal
complement N which, in turn, has discriminant 26 . Since clearly E ⊕H⊕Q is a sublattice of H2Y , the equality
of the two discriminants allows us to conclude that

                                              H2Y = E ⊕ H ⊕ Q.                                            (29)

In particular, Q must be primitively embedded in H2 (Y, Z).
    Now, by standard lattice theory ([27], Theorem 1.14.4), up to an overall isometry there exists a unique
primitive lattice embedding of H(2) ⊕ H(2) into the K3 lattice. By Remark 3.19, the orthogonal comple-
ment of such an embedding is isomorphic to the double Kummer lattice DK. We see therefore that Q⊥ is
isomorphic to DK.
    At this point, let us also note the primitive embedding L(Y) ⊂ Q⊥ . In order to show that L(Y) = Q⊥
all we need to do is verify that the two lattices involved have the same rank. The rank of Q⊥ is 18, as it is
isomorphic to DK. By definition, rank(L(Y)) ≤ 18. But

                                              N ⊕ E ⊕ H ⊂ L(Y)

and therefore rank(L(Y)) ≥ 18. Hence, we have that L(Y) = Q⊥ and therefore L(Y) is isomorphic with the
double Kummer lattice DK.

The above result shows that, by construction, Y comes endowed with a canonical primitive lattice embed-
ding DK ֒→ H2 (Y, Z). This fact, in connection with Proposition 3.20, implies that there exist two canonically
defined elliptic curves E1 , E2 (unique, up to permutation) such that

                                              Y = Km(E1 × E2 ).                                           (30)

Moreover, Proposition 3.20 together with weak form of the Global Torelli Theorem (Theorem 11.1 of [2]
§ V III), implies that L(Y) is precisely the double Kummer lattice associated to the Kummer construction
(30).
    In order to check the last assumption of Theorem 3.13, let us consider the diagram of rational maps:
                                                π      p
                                          X −→ Y ←− E1 × E2                                               (31)

where π is the map induced by the Shioda-Inose construction and p is the map associated with the Kummer
construction. The K3 surface X carries the lattice polarization i(M) ⊂ H2 (X, Z), whereas the abelian surface
E1 × E2 is H-polarized by the sublattice P ⊂ H2 (E1 × E2 , Z) spanned by the classes of E1 and E2 . In
both cases, the orthogonal complement of the polarizing lattice is isomorphic to H ⊕ H. One has then the
push-forward morphisms:
                                          π                 p∗
                               H2 (X, Z) −→
                                          ∗
                                            H2 (Y, Z) ←− H2 (E1 × E2 , Z).                                (32)

From the proof of Lemma 3.22, we have that π∗ (i(M)⊥ ) = Q = L(Y)⊥ . By Proposition 3.14, p∗ (P⊥ ) =
L(Y)⊥ . Moreover, both the restriction of the π∗ on i(M)⊥ and the restriction of p∗ on P⊥ induce isomor-
phisms of Hodge structures:
                                           π∗                p∗
                                i(M)⊥ (2) ≃ L(Y)⊥ , P⊥ (2) ≃ L(Y)⊥ .
By taking (p∗ )−1 ◦ π∗ , one obtains therefore a canonical isomorphism of polarized Hodge structures
                                                       π∗
                                                i(M)⊥ ≃ P⊥

between the surfaces X and E1 × E2 .


                                                     14
4 An Explicit Computation
In the first half of this paper, we have described a geometric correspondence:

                                              (X, i) 7→ A(X) = E1 × E2

which associates to any given M-polarized K3 surface X an abelian surface A(X) realized as a cartesian
product of two elliptic curves. In this second part of the paper we shall make this correspondence explicit.
In other words we shall compute the J-invariants of the two elliptic curves E1 and E2 .
    Note that, by the Hodge theoretic equivalence underlying the correspondence, the modular invariants
of an M-polarized K3 surface (X, i) can be written as:

                                 σ(X, i) = J(E1 ) + J(E2 ), π(X, i) = J(E1 ) · J(E2 ).

Therefore, as an immediate application of the calculation of the two J-invariants of E1 and E2 , we shall
obtain formulas for the modular invariants associated to an explicitly defined M-polarized K3 surface.

4.1 The Inose Form
In his 1977 paper [17], Inose introduced an explicit two-parameter family of K3 surfaces which carry canon-
ical M-polarizations. The surfaces in this family are defined as follows.
    Let a, b ∈ C. Denote by Q(a, b) the surface in P3 defined by the quartic equation:

                                                             1 2 2     
                           y 2 zw − 4x3 z + 3axzw2 −           z w + w4 + bzw3 = 0 .                            (33)
                                                             2
We shall refer to the polynomial on the left side of the above equation as the Inose form. The surface
Q(a, b) has only rational double point singularities and its minimal resolution, denoted X(a, b), is a K3
surface. Moreover, by construction, the surface X(a, b) has a canonical M-polarization. In order to see this,
let us note that the intersection of Q(a, b) with the hyperplane {w = 0} is a union of two lines L1 ∪ L2 with:

                                     L1 := {z = w = 0},           L2 := {x = w = 0}.

Moreover, by standard singularity theory, the points [0, 1, 0, 0] and [0, 0, 1, 0] are rational double point sin-
gularities on Q(a, b) of types A11 and E6 , respectively. As a result, one obtains on the minimal resolution
X(a, b) the following configuration of rational curves:

a1     a2     a3     a4     a5       a6     a7       a8      a9      a10      a11      L2   e1   e2   e3   e5    e6
 •     •      •      •      •        •       •       •       •        •        •       •    •    •    •    •      •


              L1                                                                                      e4
              •                                                                                       •
                                                                                                                (34)
Note already the similarity with the previously encountered diagram (15). The lattices spanned by:

                                          { a1 , a2 , L 1 , a3 , a4 , a5 , a6 , a7 }

                                          { a11 , L2 , e1 , e2 , e3 , e4 , e5 , e6 }
                           { a9 , 2a1 + 4a2 + 3L1 + 6a3 + 5a4 + 4a5 + 3a6 + 2a7 }
are mutually orthogonal and they are also isomorphic to E8 , E8 and H, respectively. As a consequence, their
direct sum provides a canonical primitive lattice embedding M ֒→ NS(X(a, b)).




                                                             15
4.2 The Main Formula
In the remaining part of the paper, we prove:
Theorem 4.1. Let E1 and E2 be the two elliptic curves associated to the M-polarized K3 surface X(a, b) by the
correspondence of Theorem 3.13. Then J(E1 ) and J(E2 ) are the two solutions of the quadratic equation:
                                                           
                                       x2 − a3 − b2 + 1 x + a3 = 0.                                      (35)

As mentioned earlier, as a consequence of the above theorem, one obtains:
Corollary 4.2. The modular invariants of the M-polarized K3 surface X(a, b) are given by:

                                                  π = a3 , σ = a3 − b2 + 1.                                (36)

Corollary 4.3. Every M-polarized K3 surface is isomorphic9 to X(a, b) for some a, b ∈ C.
Our strategy for proving Theorem 4.1 relies on a detailed analysis of the two basic algebraic invariants as-
sociated with the elliptic fibration Ψ2 on the Kummer surface Y: the functional and homological invariants.

4.3 Invariants Associated to an Elliptic Surface
Let X be a smooth compact complex analytic surface and let ϕ : X → C be a proper analytic map to a smooth
curve such that the generic fiber of ϕ is a smooth elliptic curve. Assume also that ϕ does not have multiple
fibers. There are two classical invariants that one associates to such a structure [12, 20].
 (a) The functional invariant is an analytic function Jϕ : C → P1 . It can be defined in the following man-
     ner. Let U be the complement in C of the critical values of ϕ. Then Jϕ is the meromorphic continuation
     of the composite map:
                                                              e                J
                                                   U −→ H/PSL(2, Z) −→ C
     which takes a smooth elliptic fiber to its associated point in the moduli space of elliptic curves and
     then evaluates the classical elliptic modular function10 at that respective point.
 (b) The homological invariant is, by definition, the sheaf Gϕ = R1 ϕ∗ ZX . The restriction of Gϕ on U is
     locally constant and oriented and its stalk at every point is isomorphic with Z ⊕ Z. Moreover, since ϕ
     has no multiple fibers, one has Gϕ = i∗ (Gϕ |U ) where i : U ֒→ C and therefore Gϕ is determined by its
     restriction on U. The latter sheaf is however fully determined by the conjugacy class of its monodromy
     map:                                                                   
                                        ρϕ : π1 (U, t) −→ SO H1 (ϕ−1 (t), Z)                             (37)
     One can regard, therefore, the homological invariant of ϕ as an element in Hom (π1 (U), SL(2, Z)), mod-
     ulo conjugation.
The two invariants are not unrelated. Let us assume, for simplicity, that Jϕ is not constant, as the cases of
interest to us will definitely satisfy this condition. Set then U0 ⊂ U as the open subset for which Jϕ ∈
                                                                                                       / {0, 1}
and denote by H0 the set of elements of the upper half-plane H for which the associated elliptic modular
function is neither 0 or 1. Pick t ∈ U0 . The composition
                                                          i        e
                                                 U0 ֒→ U → H/PSL(2, Z)

induces a morphism of fundamental groups:
                                                 (e◦i)#
                                   π1 (U0 , t)    →           π1 (H0 /PSL(2, Z)) ≃ PSL(2, Z)               (38)
  9 Here by the term isomorphism we mean an isomorphism of M-polarized K3 surfaces.
 10 Recall that J is normalized such that the two orbifold points of H/PSL(2, Z) are mapped to 0 and 1.




                                                                       16
The compatibility between the two invariants asserts that the above morphism agrees, modulo conjugation
with:
                                        i#          ρϕ
                            π1 (U0 , t) → π1 (U, t) → SL(2, Z) → PSL(2, Z).                        (39)
   The above compatibility condition can be introduced independent of the actual elliptic fibration over
C. Given a (non-constant) meromorphic function J : C → C with no poles on U and a morphism of Z-
modules ρ : π1 (U) → SL(2, Z), the pair (J , ρ) is said to be compatible if the associated maps (38) and (39)
agree modulo conjugation. One has then the following classical theorem of Kodaira.
Theorem 4.4. (Kodaira [20]) For a compatible pair (J , ρ) as above, there is, up to an isomorphism of elliptic surfaces,
exactly one elliptic fibration ϕ : X → C, admitting a section, with functional and homological invariants given by J
and ρ.
The above theorem provides one with a very powerful tool for comparing jacobian fibrations. Its effective-
ness is further enhanced by the fact that, given a jacobian fibration as above, the monodromy ρ(γ) of a small
loop γ circling a critical value of ϕ in a manner agreeing with the orientation of C is determined modulo
conjugation by the Kodaira type of the associated singular fiber [19]. We can state therefore the following
very particular consequence of the above discussion.
Corollary 4.5. Let ϕ and ψ be two jacobian fibrations on two K3 surfaces X and X′ .

                                                 X@                             X′                                 (40)
                                                    @@                     }}
                                                      @@                 }}
                                                        @
                                                     ϕ @@              }}
                                                                  }~ } ψ
                                                              P1

The two jacobian fibrations are isomorphic if and only if there exists a a projective automorphism q of P1 such that q
maps bijectively the singular locus of ϕ to the singular locus of ψ, Jϕ = Jψ ◦ q and, for any t in the singular locus of
ϕ, the Kodaira type of a singular fiber ϕ−1 (t) is the same as the Kodaira type of the singular fiber ψ −1 (q(t)).
Our strategy for proving Theorem 4.1 is structured as follows. We first compute the functional invariants
and Kodaira types of singular fibers of both the alternate fibration Θ2 on X(a, b), and the induced jacobian
fibration Ψ2 on the K3 surface Y(a, b). Then, switching our attention to the other side of the correspondence,
we show that, for any two elliptic curves E1 and E2 , the Kummer surface Km(E1 ×E2 ) possesses a canonical
jacobian fibration Υ2 with the same types of singular fibers as Ψ2 . Finally, using Corollary 4.5, we prove
that the two elliptic fibrations Ψ2 and Υ2 are equivalent if and only if J(E1 ) and J(E2 ) are solutions to the
quadratic equation (35).

4.4 The Alternate Fibration Θ2
It is quite easy to observe the fibration Θ2 on the surface X(a, b). The alternate fibration is induced by the
projection to [x, w] from the quartic Q(a, b). Indeed, one can easily verify the following facts.
 (a) The generic fiber of the projection to [x, w] from Q(a, b) is an elliptic curve. In fact, the fiber over [1, λ]
     can be seen as the cubic curve in P2 (y, z, w) given by:
                                                                          
                    Θλ2 := Θ2−1 ([λ, 1]) = { 2y 2 z − 8λ3 − 6azw2 − 2b zw2 − z 2 w − w3 = 0}.                  (41)

     This is a smooth cubic as long as 4λ3 − 3aλ − b 6= ±1.
 (b) After resolving the singularities of Q(a, b), the projection to [x, w] induces an elliptic fibration on the
     K3 surface X(A, B).
                                −1
 (c) The singular fiber Θ∞                                     ∗                                         ∞
                          2 := Θ2 ([1, 0]) is of Kodaira type I12 . In the context of the diagram (34), Θ2
     appears as the divisor:

                           a2 + L1 + 2 (a3 + a4 + · · · + a11 + L2 + e1 + e2 + e3 ) + e4 + e5 .


                                                              17
 (d) The curves a1 and e6 are sections of Θ2 .
Let us then compute the functional invariant of the elliptic fibration Θ2 . In order to simplify further calcu-
lations, we shall introduce the following polynomial:

                                               P(X) = 4X 3 − 3AX − B.

With this in place, one can rewrite the cubic equation in (41) in a standard Weierstrass form as:
                         √     2          3                 
                                        2                   2
                           2 yz    = z + P(λ)   + g2 (λ) z + P(λ) + g3 (λ)                                            (42)
                                        3                   3

where the terms g2 (λ) and g2 (λ) are given by:

                                               4 2               16 3      2
                                g2 (λ) = 1 −     P (λ), g3 (λ) =    P (λ) − P(λ).
                                               3                 27        3
The discriminant of Weierstrass form (42) is then:
                                                                               
                                  ∆Θ2 (λ) = 4g23 (λ) + 27g32 (λ) = 4 1 − P2 (λ) .

In the same manner, the functional invariant of Θ2 can be computed as:
                                                                               2
                                                 4g23 (λ)          3 − 4 P2 (λ)
                                       JΘ2 (λ) =          =                       .
                                                 ∆Θ2 (λ)           9(1 − P2 (λ))

The explicit formulas for g2 (λ), g3 (λ) and ∆Θ2 (λ) allow one to determine not only the location but also the
Kodaira type of the singular fibers of Θ2 . Using Tate’s algorithm [34], one obtains:
Proposition 4.6. The singular fibers of Θ2 are located at [1, 0] (the I∗12 fiber) and at the points [λ, 1] with λ belonging
to the subset:
                                             Σ := { λ | P(λ)2 = 1 }.                                                   (43)
The following five cases can occur:
   • a3 6= (b ± 1)2 . In this case, both polynomials P(X) − 1 and P(X) + 1 have three distinct roots. The subset Σ
     consists of six distinct points, each of which corresponds to a singular fiber of type I1 in Θ2 .
   • a3 = (b + 1)2 , b 6= 0, a 6= 0. In this case, P(X) + 1 has three distinct roots. However, the polynomial P(X) − 1
     has a root of order two at −(b + 1)/2a and a simple root at (b + 1)/a. The subset Σ consists of 5 distinct points.
                                                               
                                                −(b + 1) b + 1
                                      Σ =               ,          ∪ { λ | P(λ) = −1 }
                                                   2a       a

     The first value in the above list corresponds to a singular fiber of type I2 in Θ2 . The remaining four points
     correspond to fibers of type I1 .
   • a3 = (b − 1)2 , b 6= 0, a 6= 0. In this case, the polynomial P(X) − 1 has three distinct roots. However, P(X) + 1
     has a root of order two at −(b − 1)/2a and a simple root at (b − 1)/a. As in the previous case, the subset Σ
     consists of 5 distinct values.
                                                                 
                                                 −(b − 1) b − 1
                                       Σ =                 ,        ∪ { λ | P(λ) = 1 }
                                                     2a       a

     The first value in the above list corresponds to a singular fiber of type I2 in Θ2 . The remaining four points
     correspond to fibers of type I1 .



                                                            18
   • a = 0, b = ±1. Then                                                            
                                                                   1
                                              Σ = {0} ∪           √
                                                                  3
                                                                      θ | θ3 = b         .
                                                                    2
     The value λ = 0 corresponds to a singular fiber of type I3 in Θ2 . The remaining three values of Σ correspond to
     fibers of type I1 .
   • a3 = 1, b = 0. In this case one has:

                          P(X) − 1 = (2X − a2 )2 (X + a2 ), P(X) + 1 = (2X + a2 )2 (X − a2 ).

     Accordingly,
                                                         a2    a2
                                                 Σ = {      , − , −a2 , a2 }.
                                                         2      2
     The first two values in the above list correspond to singular fibers of type I2 while the last two values correspond
     to fibers of type I1 .
Next, we describe explicitly the involution β on X(a, b). Note that, in each of the smooth cubics Θλ2 of (41),
the point [1, 0, 0] is an inflection point. If one chooses this point as the origin of the cubic group law on
Θλ2 , the point [0, 1, 0] is a point of order two with respect to this law. Moreover, when regarding Θλ2 as an
elliptic fiber in X(a, b), one has that [1, 0, 0] and [0, 1, 0] are the intersections with the two sections a1 and e6 .
Therefore, the effect of β on Θλ2 can be seen, in the coordinates of (41), as the analytic continuation of:

                                 Θλ2 \ {[1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0]} → Θλ2 \ {[1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0]}                        (44)

                                              [y, z, w] 7→ [−yz, w2 , zw].
Finally, the full β is induced from the analytic involution:

                                  β1 : Q(a, b) \ (L1 ∪ L2 ) → Q(a, b) \ (L1 ∪ L2 )                                  (45)

                                        β1 ([x, y, z, w]) 7→ [xz, −yz, w2 , zw].

4.5 The Elliptic Fibration Ψ2
Let Y(a, b) be the Kummer surface obtained from X(a, b) through the Shioda-Inose construction. Recall
from section 3.5 that the alternate fibration Θ2 survives on Y(a, b) in the form of a new elliptic fibration Ψ2 .
   As we already know, the fiber Ψ∞                          ∗
                                        2 has Kodaira type I6 . In this section, we describe the location and
Kodaira type of the other singular fibers and write an explicit formula for the functional invariant JΨ2 .
   Note that the smooth fibers Ψλ2 are quotients of the cubics Θλ2 of (41) by the involution (44). By then
taking affine coordinates [y, z, 1] on Θλ2 and defining
                                                                       
                                             2             1          1
                                       u = y − P(λ), v = y z −            ,
                                                           2          z

one obtains an affine description of Ψλ2 as:

                                            v 2 = (u + P(λ))(u − 1)(u + 1).                                         (46)

This can then be easily transformed to a Weierstrass form:
                                  3                    
                     2        1          1       1 2            2 3      2
                 v       = u + P(λ) − u + P(λ)     P (λ) + 1 +    P (λ) − P(λ)                                      (47)
                              3          3       3             27        3
which has as discriminant:                                                  2
                                             ∆Ψ2 (λ) = −4 P2 (λ) − 1             .

                                                             19
It follows then that the functional invariant of the elliptic fibration Ψ2 is:
                                                                            2
                                                              P 2 (λ) + 3
                                              JΨ2 (λ) =                      2.                                         (48)
                                                            9 (P 2 (λ) − 1)

As in the previous section, the above information allows us to also describe the location and Kodaira type
of the singular fibers of Ψ2 .
Proposition 4.7. The singular fibers of the elliptic fibration Ψ2 on Y(a, b) are located at [1, 0] (the I∗6 fiber) and at the
points [λ, 1] with λ belonging to the subset:

                                                Σ := { λ | P (λ)2 = 1 }.                                                (49)

The following cases occur:
   • a3 6= (b ± 1)2 . In this case, both polynomials P(X) − 1 and P(X) + 1 have three distinct roots. The subset Σ
     consists of six distinct points, each of which corresponds to a singular fiber of type I2 in Θ2 .
   • a3 = (b + 1)2 , b 6= 0, a 6= 0. In this case, P(X) + 1 has three distinct roots. However, the polynomial P(X) − 1
     has a root of order two at −(b + 1)/2a and a simple root at (b + 1)/a. The subset Σ consists of 5 distinct points.
                                                               
                                                −(b + 1) b + 1
                                      Σ =               ,          ∪ { λ | P(λ) = −1 }
                                                   2a       a

     The first value in the above list corresponds to a singular fiber of type I4 in Θ2 . The remaining four points
     correspond to fibers of type I2 .
   • a3 = (b − 1)2 , b 6= 0, a 6= 0. In this case, the polynomial P(X) − 1 has three distinct roots. However, P(X) + 1
     has a root of order two at −(b − 1)/2a and a simple root at (b − 1)/a. As in the previous case, the subset Σ
     consists of 5 distinct values.
                                                                 
                                                 −(b − 1) b − 1
                                       Σ =                 ,        ∪ { λ | P(λ) = 1 }
                                                     2a       a

     The first value in the above list corresponds to a singular fiber of type I4 in Θ2 . The remaining four points
     correspond to fibers of type I2 .
   • a = 0, b = ±1. Then                                                          
                                                                   1
                                              Σ = {0} ∪           √
                                                                  3
                                                                      θ | θ3 = b       .
                                                                    2
     The value λ = 0 corresponds to a singular fiber of type I6 in Θ2 . The remaining three values of Σ correspond to
     fibers of type I2 .
   • a3 = 1, b = 0. In this case one has:

                        P(X) − 1 = (2X − a2 )2 (X + a2 ), P(X) + 1 = (2X + a2 )2 (X − a2 ).

     Accordingly,
                                                         a2    a2
                                                 Σ = {      , − , −a2 , a2 }.
                                                         2      2
     The first two values in the above list correspond to singular fibers of type I4 while the last two values correspond
     to fibers of type I2 .




                                                             20
4.6 A Special Elliptic Fibration on Km(E1 × E2 )
As we already know from Theorem 3.13, the surface Y(a, b) can be realized in a canonical way as the
Kummer surface Km(E1 × E2 ) associated to the product of two elliptic curves. Moreover, in this context,
the elliptic fibration Ψ2 on Y(a, b) can be derived directly from the Kummer construction.
   Recall from Section 3.4 that the surface Km(E1 × E2 ) has a canonical twenty-four curve configuration
{Hi , Gj , Eij | 0 ≤ i, j ≤ 3} called the double Kummer pencil.
Lemma 4.8. Consider the divisor D on Km(E1 × E2 ) defined as:

                   D = E21 + E31 + 2 (G1 + E01 + H0 + E00 + G0 + E10 + H1 ) + E12 + E13 .                            (50)

Then D2 = 0 and |D| is a pencil inducing an elliptic fibration Υ2 : Km(E1 × E2 ) → P1 . The divisor D is a singular
fiber for Υ2 and has Kodaira type I∗6 . The four smooth rational curves H2 , H3 , G2 and G3 form four disjoint sections
of Υ2 .

                   H2     E21                                                                    E12   G2
                   •        •   @@                                                                •    •
                                  @@                                                         ~
                                    @                                                      ~~
                                                                                         ~~
                                        G1   E01      H0    E00    G0       E10     H1
                                        •     •        •     •      •        •      •    @@
                                    ~                                                      @@
                                  ~~                                                         @
                                ~~
                   H3     E32                                                                    E13   G3
                   •        •                                                                     •    •

Proof. The above assertion is a consequence of a classical theorem due to I.I. Pjateckiĭ-Šapiro and I.R.
Šafarevič ([30], Chapter 3, Theorem 1).

Remark 4.9. A different selection of the double Kummer pencil curves defining the divisor (50) alters the elliptic
fibration Υ2 by an analytic automorphism of Km(E1 × E2 ). The equivalence class of Υ2 is therefore well-defined.
Remark 4.10. In [29], K. Oguiso classified all jacobian fibrations on a Kummer surface associated to a product of two
non-isogenous elliptic curves. The elliptic fibration Υ2 defined above appears as J5 in Oguiso’s classification. It is the
only jacobian fibration on such a surface that admits a singular fiber of Kodaira type I∗6 .
By virtue of the geometric correspondence

                                                    X(a, b) −→ E1 × E2

described in the first part of the paper, one has, as an intermediate step, an isomorphism

                                                   Y(a, b) ≃ Km(E1 × E2 )

that maps the jacobian fibration Ψ2 on Y(a, b) to the jacobian fibration Υ2 on Km(E1 × E2 ).
    This fact allows one to realize an explicit relation between the Inose parameters a, b of the M-polarized
K3 surface X(a, b) and the J-invariants of the two resulting elliptic curves E1 and E2 . In light of Corollary
4.5, the two jacobian fibrations Ψ2 on Y(a, b) and Υ2 on Km(E2 × E2 ) are equivalent if and only if their
functional invariant and singular locus differ by a projective transformation and the Kodaira types of their
singular fibers match.
    We have already described in detail the functional invariant and the location and type of the singular
fibers of Ψ2 . In what follows we shall perform a similar analysis for Υ2 . The comparison between these two
pieces of data will then allow us to prove the main statement of Theorem 4.1.
Claim 4.11. The two elliptic fibrations Ψ2 and Υ2 have equivalent functional and homological invariants if and only
if
                              J(E1 ) + J(E2 ) = a3 − b2 + 1, J(E1 ) · J(E2 ) = a3 .


                                                            21
4.7 Description of the Elliptic Fibration Υ2 on Km(E1 × E2 )
It is a standard fact that any given elliptic curve can be realized as a projective Legendre cubic

                                     { y 2 w = x(x − w)(x − λw) } ⊂ P2

for some λ ∈ C \ {0, 1}. We shall assume therefore that α, β ∈ C are chosen such that E1 and E2 are
isomorphic with the above cubics for λ = α and λ = β, respectively. The J-invariants of the two curves can
then be computed as:
                                    4(α2 − α + 1)3             4(β 2 − β + 1)3
                         J(E1 ) =                  , J(E 2 ) =                 .
                                     27α2 (α − 1)2              27β 2 (β − 1)2
In this context, an explicit model for the Kummer surface Km(E1 × E2 ) can be constructed (see [7, 17]) by
taking the minimal resolution of the quartic surface:

                            { z 2 xy = (x − w)(x − αw)(y − w)(y − βw) } ⊂ P3 .                               (51)

Note that, generically, the quartic surface (51) has seven rational double point singularities located at:

                                        [1, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 1, 0], [0, 0, 1, 0]

                                [1, 1, 0, 1], [α, 1, 0, 1], [1, β, 0, 1], [α, β, 0, 1].
The first three are rational double points of type A3 . The last four are singularities of type A1 . One can
therefore reconstruct the double Kummer pencil on the minimal resolution of (51) by taking:

                        H0 + E00 + G0 = A3 configuration associated to [0, 0, 1, 0]

                        E21 + G1 + E31 = A3 configuration associated to [1, 0, 0, 0]
                        E12 + H1 + E13 = A3 configuration associated to [0, 1, 0, 0]
                                  E22 = A1 curve associated to [1, 1, 0, 1]
                                  E32 = A1 curve associated to [α, 1, 0, 1]
                                  E23 = A1 curve associated to [1, β, 0, 1]
                                  E33 = A1 curve associated to [α, β, 0, 1]
                                 H2 = proper transform of {x = w, z = 0}
                                H3 = proper transform of {x = αw, z = 0}
                                 G2 = proper transform of {y = w, z = 0}
                                G3 = proper transform of {y = βw, z = 0}
                                  E01 = proper transform of {x = w = 0}
                                  E10 = proper transform of {y = w = 0}
                               E11 = proper transform of {w = 0, z 2 = xy}
                                E02 = proper transform of {x = 0, y = w}
                                E03 = proper transform of {x = 0, y = βw}
                                E20 = proper transform of {y = 0, x = w}
                               E30 = proper transform of {y = 0, x = αw}
A simple analysis of the curves Hi , Gj and locations of the intersections with Eij allows one to conclude
that the minimal resolution of (51) is canonically isomorphic to Km(E1 × E2 ).

                                                          22
Remark 4.12. The birational morphism Km(E1 × E2 ) → P3 whose image is the quartic surface (51) can also be
defined directly from the double Kummer pencil by taking the projective morphism associated to the base-point free
linear system |V| given by:
               V = E12 + 2H1 + E13 + E10 + G0 + E00 + H0 + E01 + 2G1 + E21 + E31 + 2E11 .
                          E21                                                                       E12
                           •    @@                                                                   •
                                  @@                                                            ~
                                    @                                                         ~~
                                                                                            ~~
                                        G1
                                        •    UUUUE•01    H0
                                                          •
                                                                E00
                                                                 •
                                                                      G0
                                                                       •
                                                                              E10    H1
                                                                               • iiii • @
                                    ~            UUUU                        ii i        @@
                                  ~~                  UUUU
                                                                        iiii
                                                                            i              @@
                                ~~                        UUUU
                                                              U E iiiii
                          E32                                     11                          E      13
                           •                                      •                                  •

The advantage of the realization of Km(E1 × E2 ) as the quartic surface (51), follows from the fact that, in
this context, one can explicitly construct the jacobian fibration Υ2 of Lemma 4.8. This elliptic fibration is
induced by the rational map:
                                        [x, y, z, w] 7→ [R(x, y, w), xy]
where R(x, y, w) is the quadratic polynomial:
                                                                  
                                   1    2     1    2    α+1          β+1
                 R(x, y, w) = −        x + −      y +         xw +         yw − w2 .
                                   α          β          α            β
The I∗6 fiber of Υ2 appears over the point [1, 0]. Away from this location, the generic smooth elliptic fiber
                                                         Υλ2 := Υ−1
                                                                 2 ([µ, 1])

can be regarded as the double cover of the projective conic in P2 (x, y, w):
                                                         R(x, y, w) = µxy                                      (52)
branched at the four points:
                                             [1, (1 − µ)β + 1, 1], [α, (1 − µα)β + 1, 1],                      (53)
                                             [(1 − µ)α + 1, 1, 1], [(1 − µβ)α + 1, β, 1].
One encounters singular fibers if the conic (52) is singular, or if at least two of the above four branch points
coincide. This argument allows one to conclude that the points on the base of the fibration Υ2 associated to
singular fibers (away from the I∗6 fiber) are of type [µ, 1] with µ belonging to the set:
                                                                             
                                                1 1 1 αβ + 1 α + β
                                 ΣΥ2 := 1, , ,             ,         ,          .
                                                α β αβ          αβ       αβ
Remark 4.13. For generic choices of α and β, the above set contains six distinct points, each of which determines an
I2 fiber in Υ2 . However, it may happen that two, or more, of the above six values coincide. This happens precisely
when:                                                                         
                                            1            1        α     α−1
                                 β ∈ α, , 1 − α,              ,       ,           ,                             (54)
                                            α          1−α α−1            α
a condition that is also equivalent to J(E1 ) = J(E2 ).
Lemma 4.14. The functional invariant of the jacobian fibration Υ2 has the form:
                                                                                3
                                           4 α4 β 4 D(µ) + (α − 1)2 (β − 1)2
                              JΥ2 (µ) =                                                                        (55)
                                              27 α8 β 8 (α − 1)4 (β − 1)4 D2 (µ)
where:                                                           
                                    1      1       1      αβ + 1      α+β
                D(µ) := (µ − 1) µ −     µ−     µ−      µ−          µ−       .
                                    α      β      αβ       αβ          αβ


                                                                 23
Proof. We accomplish the computation of JΥ2 (µ) through the following sequence of steps.
  1. Construct an explicit isomorphism iµ between the conic (52) and P1 .
  2. Perform a projective automorphism of P1 such that the images through iµ of the four branch points
     (53) are sent to [0, 1], [1, 1], [r, 1] and [1, 0].
  3. Evaluate JΥ2 (µ) as:
                                                    4(r2 − r + 1)3
                                                                   .                              (56)
                                                     27r2 (r − 1)2
In order to complete the first step, let us note that:

                                              R(x, y, w) − µxy =
                           2        2             2                         
            α+1          β+1          α−1      2      β−1       2    (α + 1)(β + 1)
     − w−          x−           y +           x +             y +                   − µ xy =
             2α           2β           2α              2β                 2αβ
                              2                                          2
               α+1          β+1           α−1           (α + 1)(β + 1)          α
       − w−           x−          y +            x+                    −µ            y +
                2α           2β            2α                2αβ              α−1
                       "       2                     2       2 #
                          β−1        (α + 1)(β + 1)            α
                     +            −                 −µ                 y2 =
                            2β            2αβ                α−1
                               2                                         2
                α+1         β+1             α−1           (α + 1)(β + 1)          α
         − w−          x−           y +            x+                    −µ          y +
                 2α           2β             2α                2αβ              α−1
                    "                2                     2 #       2
                       (α − 1)(β − 1)      (α + 1)(β + 1)             α
                  +                     −                  −µ                y2 =
                            2αβ                 2αβ                  α−1
                            2                                        2
                α+1        β+1           α−1           (α + 1)(β + 1)        α
         − w−         x−         y +             x+                   −µ         y +
                 2α         2β            2α                2αβ             α−1
                                                       2
                                α+β          αβ + 1       α
                       −    µ−          µ−                       y2 =
                                 αβ           αβ         α−1
                                                                    
                  1         β+1       α                          β+1      α
            = w− x− µ−                     y    −w + x − µ −                   y −
                  α          αβ     α−1                           β      α−1
                                                         2
                                 α+β          αβ + 1        α
                         −    µ−         µ−                        y2
                                  αβ            αβ        α−1
The change in projective coordinates:
                                                                 
                                          β+1     α                α
                       x1 = −w + x − µ −                y, y1 =         y
                                           β     α−1              α−1
                                                           
                                        1         β+1      α
                              w1 = w − x − µ −                  y
                                        α          αβ     α−1
allows one to rewrite the conic (52) as:
                                                   x1 w1 = ∆y12
where:                                                     
                                             α+β       αβ + 1
                                      ∆ = µ−        µ−          .
                                              αβ        αβ



                                                         24
This yields the parametrization of (52) via the embedding:

                                            P1 ֒→ P2 , [u, v] 7→ [u2 , uv, ∆v 2 ]

with the inverse map iµ given by the analytic continuation of [x1 , y1 , w1 ] 7→ [x1 , y1 ]. This procedure results
in an identification between the conic (52) and P1 which sends the four branch points (53) to

                                      [β + 1 − βµ, β], [αβ∆, β + 1 − µαβ],

                                       [αβ + 1 − µαβ, β], [α + β − µαβ, β].
In accordance with the plan presented earlier, we take:

                            ((αβ + 1 − µαβ) − (β + 1 − βµ)) ((αβ∆) − (α + β − µαβ))
                     r =                                                            =
                            ((αβ + 1 − µαβ) − (α + β − µαβ)) ((αβ∆) − (β + 1 − βµ))
                                             (µ − 1)(µαβ − 1)(µαβ − α − β)
                                        =                                  .
                                                     (α − 1)(β − 1)
Then the functional invariant is computed as:
                                                                                     3
                                 4(r2 − r + 1)3   4 α4 β 4 D(µ) + (α − 1)2 (β − 1)2
                       JΥ2 (µ) =                =                                       .
                                  27r2 (r − 1)2    27 α8 β 8 (α − 1)4 (β − 1)4 D2 (µ)



The above discussion also provides the homological invariant data of the fibration Υ2 .
Corollary 4.15. In addition to the I∗6 singular fiber which appears over the point [1, 0], the elliptic fibrations Υ2 has
singular fibers at the points [µ, 1] with µ belonging to the set:

                                                ΣΥ2 = {µ | D(µ) = 0 }.

The following cases can occur:
 (a) J(E1 ) 6= J(E2 ). In this case ΣΥ2 has six distinct points and each of them corresponds to an I2 singular fiber.
 (b) J(E1 ) = J(E2 ) ∈
                     / {0, 1}. In this case the polynomial D(µ) has five distinct roots, one of which is of order two.
     The order-two root corresponds to a singular fiber of type I4 . The remaining four roots correspond to I2 fibers.
 (c) J(E1 ) = J(E2 ) = 1. In this case the polynomial D(µ) has four distinct roots, two of which have order two. The
     two roots of order two correspond to singular fibers of type I4 . The remaining two roots correspond to fibers of
     type I2 .
 (d) J(E1 ) = J(E2 ) = 0. In this case the polynomial D(µ) has four distinct roots, one of which is of order three. The
     order-three root corresponds to singular fiber of type I3 . The remaining three roots correspond to fibers of type
     I2 .

4.8 Proof of Claim 4.11
Recall the analysis of Sections 4.5 and 4.7. Both fibrations Ψ2 and Υ2 have the I∗6 singular fiber located over
the point [1, 0] and their respective functional invariants, as described in (48) and (55), are :
                                                            2
                                               P2 (λ) + 3
                                 JΨ2 (λ) =                   2,   P(λ) = 4λ3 − 3aλ − b.                             (57)
                                             9 (P2 (λ) − 1)
                                                                               3
                                            4 α4 β 4 D(µ) + (α − 1)2 (β − 1)2
                                  JΥ2 (µ) =                                       .                                 (58)
                                             27 α8 β 8 (α − 1)4 (β − 1)4 D2 (µ)

                                                             25
The main polynomial in the denominator of JΨ2 (λ) is P2 (λ) − 1. Its (generic) six roots are naturally divided
into two sets of three roots, each three-set having the sum of its elements equal to zero. A similar feature
can be observed in the denominator of JΥ2 (µ). The main polynomial present there is D(µ) whose (generic)
six roots can be partitioned into two sets of three with identical sum.
                                                                                           
                   1 1 1 αβ + 1 α + β                       1 α+β               1 1 αβ + 1
                1, , ,        ,        ,           =    1,    ,          ∪        , ,                      (59)
                   α β αβ         αβ      αβ               αβ     αβ            α β       αβ
The two fibrations Ψ2 and Υ2 have equivalent functional invariant and homological invariant data if and
only if there exists an invertible affine transformation Ξ(λ) = qλ + p with p, q ∈ C (q 6= 0) such that
                                              JΨ2 (λ) = JΥ2 (Ξ(λ))                                         (60)
and Ξ sends the roots of P(λ) ± 1 to the two subsets in (59) while preserving the homological type.
   As a first observation, we note that it follows that p = (α + 1)(β + 1)/3αβ. Let then:
                                                                        
                                                           1         α+β
                                D1 (µ) = (µ − 1) µ −             µ−
                                                          αβ          αβ
                                                                       
                                                 1         1         αβ + 1
                               D2 (µ) = µ −           µ−        µ−            .
                                                 α         β          αβ
Two possibilities can occur:
 (a) q 3 (P(λ) − 1) = 4D1 (qλ + p) and q 3 (P(λ) + 1) = 4D2 (qλ + p)
 (b) q 3 (P(λ) − 1) = 4D2 (qλ + p) and q 3 (P(λ) + 1) = 4D1 (qλ + p).
Making the constant terms coincide implies, in the two cases:
                                     (α − 2)(α + 1)(2α − 1)(β − 2)(β + 1)(2β − 1)
                            b = ±
                                                 27α(α − 1)β(β − 1)
and
                                                      2(α − 1)(β − 1)
                                            q3 = −                    .                                    (61)
                                                           α2 β 2
The first equality, in turn, requires the a priori condition.
                  (α − 2)2 (α + 1)2 (2α − 1)2 (β − 2)2 (β + 1)2 (2β − 1)2
           b2 =                                                           = (J(E1 ) − 1) (J(E2 ) − 1) .    (62)
                                729α2 (α − 1)2 β 2 (β − 1)2
Continuing the argument, we note that when imposing the equality of the linear terms in the above cases,
one is led to:
                                            4(α2 − α + 1)(β 2 − β + 1)
                                      a =                              .                            (63)
                                                      9α2 β 2 q 2
This constraint, in connection with (61), requires a second a priori condition:
                                    16(α2 − α + 1)3 (β 2 − β + 1)3
                            a3 =                                   = J(E1 ) · J(E2 ).                      (64)
                                      729α2 (α − 1)2 β 2 (β − 1)2
Then, depending on the case in question, one can eventually solve for q, yielding:
                                                   −9(α − 1)(β − 1)
                                       q = ±                              .
                                               2(α2 − α + 1)(β 2 − β + 1)
The equivalence (60) of functional invariants is immediately verified. To finish the proof of Claim 4.11, we
note that conditions (62) and (64) are equivalent to:
                               J(E1 ) + J(E2 ) = a3 − b2 + 1, J(E1 ) · J(E2 ) = a3 .


                                                        26
5 A String Duality Point of View
Following the works of Vafa [35] and Sen [32] in 1996, it was noted that the geometry underlying elliptic
K3 surfaces with section is related to the geometry of elliptic curves endowed with certain flat principal G-
bundles and an additional parameter called the B-field. This non-trivial connection appears in string theory
as the eight-dimensional manifestation of the phenomenon called F-theory/heterotic string duality. Over
the past ten years the correspondence has been analyzed extensively ([6, 10]) from a purely mathematical
point of view. As it turns out, it leads to a beautiful geometric picture which links together moduli spaces
for these two seemingly distinct types of geometrical objects: elliptic K3 surfaces with section and flat
bundles over elliptic curves.
    In brief, what happens is the following. On the F-theory side, one has the moduli space MK3 of elliptic
K3 surfaces with section. This is a quasi-projective analytic variety of complex dimension eighteen. How-
ever, MK3 is not compact. Nevertheless, there exists a nice smooth partial compactification MK3 ⊂ MK3 ,
consisting of an enlargement of the original space by adding two Type II Mumford boundary divisors D1
and D2 . Geometrically, the points of the two compactifying divisors correspond to Type II stable elliptic K3
surfaces. These are special degenerations of K3 surfaces realized as a union V1 ∪ V2 of two rational surfaces
meeting over a common elliptic curve E which is anti-canonical on both V1 and V2 .
    On the heterotic side, one has to consider two moduli spaces MG       het of triples (E, P, B) consisting of
elliptic curves, flat G-bundles, and B-fields. There are two choices of Lie groups G:

                                       (E8 × E8 ) ⋊ Z2      Spin(32)/Z2 .                                   (65)

The moduli space ME,G associated to the first two components (E, P) of the above triples is (as described in
[14]) a quasi-projective analytic space of complex dimension seventeen. The actual heterotic moduli space
MG                                                            ∗
   het (described in [8]) fibers naturally as a holomorphic C fibration over ME,G .
    In this context, the mathematical facts underlying the string duality can be summarized as follows. Each
of the two moduli spaces ME,G associated to the two choices of possible Lie groups on the heterotic side
is naturally isomorphic to one of the corresponding Type II Mumford boundary divisors D1 and D2 from
the F-theory side. Moreover, there exists a holomorphic identification between an open subset of MG          het
neighboring the cusps of the C∗ -fibration over ME,G and a special subset (of large complex structures) of
MK3 which makes an open neighborhood of the corresponding boundary divisor. We refer the reader to
[9, 10] for further details and proofs.
    The above holomorphic identification between the appropriate regions of MK3 and MG          het is however
defined Hodge-theoretically and therefore is not fully satisfactory from a geometer’s point of view. As
with any string duality, one would like to have a purely geometrical pattern that connects the spaces and
structures appearing on the two sides of the duality correspondence.
    Such a geometric connection, in the context of the above duality, has been known for some time, but
only in the stable limit, i.e. on the boundary of the moduli spaces [1, 13]. As mentioned earlier, on the
F-theory side this limit corresponds to stable K3 surfaces, whereas on the heterotic side it corresponds to
B = 0. Given a Type II stable K3 surface V1 ∪ V2 , one can obtain the heterotic elliptic curve E by just taking
the common curve V1 ∩ V2 and the heterotic G-bundle can also be derived explicitly from the geometry of
the rational surfaces V1 and V2 .
    It is natural to ask whether there exists a geometrical transformation underlying the Hodge theoretic
duality away from the stable boundary, i.e. in the bulk of the two moduli spaces involved MK3 and MG        het ,
or at least in the large complex structure region [9]. The simplest case to consider is the restriction on the
heterotic side to the P = 0 locus. From the Hodge-theoretic correspondence, one knows that this restriction
corresponds on the F-theory side to K3 surfaces with a special lattice polarization of type M = H ⊕ E8 ⊕ E8 .
These are precisely the M-polarized K3 surfaces that form the main focus of this paper. Moreover, on the
heterotic side, under the vanishing of the flat bundle, the B-field has the same properties as a second elliptic
curve. Therefore this special case of the duality can be regarded as relating Hodge-theoretically M-polarized
K3 surfaces to pairs of elliptic curves:
                                                 X ←→ (E, B) .

                                                       27
This is the precisely the Hodge-theoretic identification from equation (10).
   From this point of view, the transformation we described in Section 3, and for which we have computed
explicit formulas in Section 4, provides the proper geometrical description of the F-theory/heterotic string
duality for M-polarized K3 surfaces.


References
 [1] P. Aspinwall and D. Morrison, Point-like Instantons in K3 Orbifolds. Nuclear Phys. B, 503(3), 1997.
 [2] W. Barth, C. Peters and A. Van de Ven, Compact Complex Surfaces. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer
     Grenzgebiete., vol. 4, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin 2004.
 [3] M. Billo, F. Denef, P. Fre, I. Pesando, W. Troost, A. Van Proeyen and D. Zanon, The Rigid Limit in
     Special Kahler Geometry. Classical Quantum Gravity, 15(8), 1998.
 [4] C. Birkenhake and H. Lange, Complex Abelian Varieties. Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wis-
     senschaften, vol. 302, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin 2004.
 [5] P. Candelas and H. Skarke, F-theory, SO(32) and Toric Geometry. Phys. Lett. B, 413(1-2), 1997.
 [6] G. L. Cardoso, G. Curio, D. Lust and T. Mohaupt, On the Duality Between the Heterotic String and
     F -Theory in 8 Dimensions. Phys. Lett. B, 389(3), 1996.
 [7] J.W. Cassels and E.W. Flynn, Prolegomena to a Middlebrow Arithmetic of Curves of Genus 2. London
     Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, 230, Cambridge University Press, 1996.
 [8] A. Clingher, Heterotic String Data and Theta Functions. Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 9(2), 2005.
 [9] A. Clingher and C. Doran, On K3 Surfaces with Large Complex Structure. math.AG/0508249
[10] A. Clingher and J.W. Morgan, Mathematics Underlying the F-Theory/Heterotic Duality in Eight Di-
     mensions. Comm. Math. Phys. 254(3), 2005.
[11] I.V. Dolgachev, Mirror Symmetry for Lattice Polarized K3 Surfaces. J. Math. Sci. 81(3), 1996.
[12] R. Friedman and J.W. Morgan, Smooth Four-Manifolds and Complex Surfaces. Springer Verlag, 1984.
[13] R. Friedman, J.W. Morgan and E. Witten, Vector Bundles and F-Theory. Comm. Math. Phys, 187, 1997.
[14] R. Friedman, J.W. Morgan and E. Witten, Principal G-Bundles over Elliptic Curves. Math. Res. Lett.
     5(1-2), 1998.
[15] S. Hosono, B.H. Lian, K. Oguiso and S-T. Yau, c=2 Rational Toroidal Conformal Field Theories via the
     Gauss Product. Comm. Math. Phys., 241(2-3), 2003.
[16] S. Hosono, B. Lian, K. Oguiso and S-T. Yau, Kummer Structures on a K3 Surface: An Old Question of
     T. Shioda. Duke Math. J., 120(3), 2003.
[17] H. Inose, Defining Equations of Singular K3 Surfaces and a Notion of Isogeny. Proceedings of the
     International Symposium on Algebraic Geometry, Kyoto, 1977.
[18] H. Inose and T. Shioda, On Singular K3 Surfaces. Complex Analysis and Algebraic Geometry: Papers
     Dedicated to K. Kodaira. Iwanami Shoten and Cambridge University Press 1977.
[19] K. Kodaira, On Compact Analytic Surfaces. Analytic Functions, Princeton University Press, 1960.
[20] K. Kodaira, On Compact Analytic Surfaces. (II) Annals of Math. 77, 1963.
[21] S. Kondo, Automorphisms of Algebraic K3 Surfaces Which Act Trivially on Picard Groups. J. Math.
     Soc. Japan, 44(1), 1992.
[22] A. Kumar, Personal communication, Feb. 2006.
[23] A. Mayer, Families of K3 Surfaces. Nagoya Math. J., 48, 1972.
[24] D. Morrison, On K3 Surfaces with Large Picard Number. Invent. Math. 75, 1984.

                                                     28
[25] D. Morrison and C. Vafa, Compactifications of F-Theory on Calabi-Yau Threefolds. II. Nuclear Phys. B,
     476(3), 1996.
[26] V. Nikulin, On Kummer Surfaces. Math. USSR Izvestija, 9, 1975.
[27] V. Nikulin, Integral Symmetric Bilinear Forms and Some of Their Applications. Math. USSR Izv. 14,
     1980.
[28] V. Nikulin, Finite Automorphism Groups of Kähler K3 Surfaces. Trans. Moscow Math. Soc. 2, 1980.
[29] K. Oguiso, On Jacobian Fibrations on the Kummer Surfaces of the Product of Nonisogenous Elliptic
     Curves. J. Math. Soc. Japan, 41(4), 1989.
[30] I.I. Pjateckiĭ-Šapiro and I.R. Šafarevič, A Torelli Theorem for Algebraic Surfaces of Type K3. Math.
     USSR Izv. 35, 1971.
[31] W. Ruppert, When is an Abelian Surface Isomorphic or Isogenous to a Product of Elliptic Curves?.
     Math. Z., 203(2), 1990.
[32] A. Sen, F-Theory and Orientifolds. Nuclear Phys. B, 475(3), 1996.
[33] T. Shioda, On the Mordell-Weil Lattices. Comment. Math. Univ. St. Paul, 39, 1990.
[34] J. Tate, Algorithm for Determining the Type of a Singular Fiber in an Elliptic Pencil. in Modular functions
     of one variable, IV, Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 476, Springer Verlag, 1975.
[35] C. Vafa, Evidence for F-Theory. Nuclear Phys. B, 469(3), 1996.
[36] D.Q. Zhang, Quotients of K3 Surfaces Modulo Involutions. Japan. J. Math., 24(2), 1998.




                                                      29
