                                         HD-THEP-08-27



                                                               Fixing D7 Brane Positions
                                                                  by F-Theory Fluxes
arXiv:0811.2416v2 [hep-th] 12 Dec 2008




                                                     A. P. Braun1, A. Hebecker1, C. Lüdeling1,2, R. Valandro1
                                                           1
                                                               Institut für Theoretische Physik, Universität Heidelberg,
                                                                 Philosophenweg 16-19, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
                                         2
                                             Bethe Center for Theoretical Physics and Physikalisches Institut der Universität Bonn,
                                                                    Nussallee 12, 53115 Bonn, Germany
                                                      a.braun, a.hebecker, r.valandro @thphys.uni-heidelberg.de,
                                                                   luedeling@th.physik.uni-bonn.de




                                                                                     Abstract


                                                   To do realistic model building in type IIB supergravity, it is important to under-
                                               stand how to fix D7-brane positions by the choice of fluxes. More generally, F-theory
                                               model building requires the understanding of how fluxes determine the singularity
                                               structure (and hence gauge group and matter content) of the compactification. We
                                               analyse this problem in the simple setting of M-theory on K3 × K3. Given a certain
                                               flux which is consistent with the F-theory limit, we can explicitly derive the positions
                                               at which D7 branes or stacks of D7 branes are stabilised. The analysis is based on a
                                               parameterization of the moduli space of type IIB string theory on T 2 /Z2 (including
                                               D7-brane positions) in terms of the periods of integral cycles of M-theory on K3.
                                               This allows us, in particular, to select a specific desired gauge group by the choice of
                                               flux numbers.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                            3

2 K3 Flux Potential                                                                       5
  2.1 M-Theory on K3 × K3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       6
  2.2 The Scalar Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
  2.3 Gauge Symmetry Breaking by Flux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        10

3 Moduli Stabilisation                                                                   13
  3.1 Minkowski Minima . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     13
  3.2 F-Theory Limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15

4 Brane Localisation                                                                     18
  4.1 D-Brane Positions and Complex Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18
  4.2 Fixing D7-brane Configurations by Fluxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
  4.3 Fixing an SO(8)4 Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
  4.4 Moving Branes by Fluxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
  4.5 Fixing almost all Moduli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28

5 SUSY Vacua                                                                             29

6 Conclusions                                                                            30

A Lattice of Integral Cycles of K3                                                       33

B The Potential in Terms of W and W̌                                                     33

C Linear Algebra on Spaces with Indefinite Metric                                        35

D F-Theory Point in the Kähler Moduli Space                                             37

References                                                                               38




                                             2
1         Introduction
Over the past years, significant progress in some of the central phenomenological problems
of string theory compactifications has been made. These problems include, in particular,
moduli stabilisation, SUSY breaking, inflation and the possibility of fine-tuning the cos-
mological constant in the landscape of flux vacua. Much of this has been realised most
successfully and explicitly in type IIB Calabi–Yau orientifold models in the supergravity
regime (for reviews, see e.g. [1–5]). However, obtaining the standard model particle spec-
trum remains difficult in this context, although successful local constructions exist [6–11].
    Motivated by the desire to make progress towards a type IIB (or, more generally, F-
theory) derivation of the standard model, the present paper analyses the way in which fluxes
determine D7 brane positions. This is central to weakly coupled type IIB models, where D7
brane stacks and their intersections are responsible for non-Abelian gauge symmetries and
charged matter. We approach such compactifications from the F-theory perspective [12,13],
where the value of the type IIB dilaton is encoded in the complex structure of a torus
attached to every point of the type IIB manifold. D7 branes are characterised by the
degeneration loci of this torus fibration and non-Abelian gauge symmetries arise if the
degeneration is so bad that the 8d compact space develops a singularity. Such singularities
are associated with the shrinking of M-theory cycles, which is easy to ensure by the flux
choice. In addition, in weakly coupled situations, the periods of M-theory cycles measure
the relative positions of D7 branes.
    Working in the simple setting of F-theory on K3 × K3 (which corresponds to type IIB
on K3 × T 2 /Z2 ), we are able to demonstrate how fluxes stabilise D7 branes or stacks of
D7 branes in a completely explicit fashion. This allows us to select a specific desired gauge
group by the choice of flux numbers. As explained above, this is the same procedure re-
quired for the flux stabilisation of non-Abelian gauge symmetries in the (non-perturbative)
F-theory context, which has recently attracted significant attention in the context of GUT
model building [6, 7, 14–16]. We therefore expect that straightforward generalisations of
our methods will be useful both for more complicated D7 brane models as well as for their
non-perturbative F-theory cousins.
    Moduli stabilisation by fluxes in M-theory on K3 × K3 has been studied extensively
in the past, especially in relation with the type IIB dual (see, e.g. [17–19]). In our work
we derive the flux potential for the geometric moduli from dimensional reduction. We
express it in a form manifestly invariant under the SO(3) symmetry of the K3 moduli
space. In this form, it is immediate to see how the minimisation condition is translated
into a condition on fluxes and on geometric data of the two K3’s. We find all Minkowski
minima, both supersymmetric and non-supersymmetric. An analogous explicit search for
(supersymmetric) flux vacua has been reported in [20]. Our results are more general since
we do not restrict ourselves to attractive K3 surfaces, where a maximal number of integral
2-cycles are holomorphic.1
    1
        At a technical level, this means that only a discrete set of values are allowed for the various complex

                                                        3
    Our analysis of moduli stabilisation is also more explicit than the previous works on
K3 × K3, since we use a parameterisation of D7-brane motion by the size of integral two-
cycles, as derived in [21]. Thus, at least in the weak coupling limit, we have a simple
geometric interpretation for every integral basis cycle. Using the choice of flux numbers,
this gives us full control over the positions of 4 O7 planes and 16 D7 branes moving on a
CP1 base (corresponding to type IIB on T 2 /Z2 ).
    Our techniques can be used to study the stabilisation of all the gauge groups that can
be realised by F-theory on K3. It turns out that tadpole cancellation is very restrictive
and allows only very special flux choices.
    We begin our analysis in Section 2 with a derivation of the K3×K3 flux potential, which
closely follows the generic Calabi-Yau derivation of [22–24]. We emphasise the fact that,
due to the hyper-Kähler structure of K3, its geometric moduli space can be visualised by
the motion of a three-plane in the 22-dimensional space of homology classes of two-cycles.
This three-plane is spanned by the real and imaginary parts of the holomorphic 2-form and
by the Kähler form. The resulting SO(3) symmetry of the geometric moduli is manifest
in the expression for the scalar potential we arrive at. The three-dimensional theory also
has a number of gauge fields, and the flux induces mass terms for some of them, which
we derive explicitly. This breaking of gauge symmetries can be understood in the dual
type IIB picture as the gauging of some shift symmetry in the flux background.
    In Section 3 we analyse the minima of the above flux potential. To preserve four-
dimensional Poincaré invariance, we consider 4-form fluxes that belong to H 2 (K3) ⊗
H 2(K3). A flux of this form gives rise to a linear map between the spaces of two-cycles of
the two K3’s: integrating the flux on a 2-cycle of one K3 we get a 2-form on the other K3
(which is Poincaré dual to a 2-cycle). Minkowski vacua arise if the flux maps the three-
planes determining the metric of the K3’s onto each other. We derive the conditions the
flux matrix has to satisfy in order for two such planes to exist and to be completely fixed
by the choice of fluxes. Furthermore, we clarify the more restrictive conditions under which
the plane determined by the flux is consistent with the F-theory limit. In this case, the
plane cannot be fixed completely. The unfixed moduli correspond to Wilson lines around
the S 1 of the type IIB model which decompactifies in the F-theory limit. These degrees
of freedom are not part of the moduli space of type IIB compactified to four dimensions,
as they characterise the (unphysical) constant background value of one component of the
four-dimensional vector fields. In fact, the corresponding propagating degrees of freedom
become part of the four-dimensional vector fields (see [25] for a comprehensive analysis of
the duality map between the 4d fields of M-theory on K3 × K3 and type IIB string theory
on K3 × T 2 /Z2 ).
    The main point of our paper, the explicit stabilisation of D-brane positions, is the
subject of Section 4. After recalling the parameterisation of D7-brane motion in terms of
M-theory cycles derived in [21], we provide explicit examples of flux matrices which fix
structure moduli. There is then also only a very restricted set of fluxes which are suitable for stabilising
such points.

                                                     4
situations with gauge symmetries SO(8)4 , SO(8)3 × SO(6) and SO(8)3 × SO(4) × SU(2).
In all cases we also fix the complex structure moduli of the lower K3. The first case
corresponds to the orientifold, where 4 D7 branes lie on top of each O7 plane. In the
second case, one D7 brane is moved away from an O plane. Finally, in the third case, a
stack of two D7 branes is separated from one of the O planes. In these examples almost all
the Kähler moduli (which correspond to deformations of the lower K3 and do not affect
the positions of the D7 branes) are not stabilised. When one of them is stabilised, a Kähler
modulus of the upper K3 is stabilised, too. As mentioned before, this corresponds to some
gauge field becoming massive. To clarify this point, we present two examples where one
of the D7 branes is fixed at a certain distance from its O plane: In the first example,
one further Kähler modulus is fixed, breaking the U(1) gauge group. This phenomenon
of gauging by fluxes is common in flux compactifications [26–29]. In the second example,
we stabilise the single D7 brane without fixing further Kähler moduli and hence without
gauge symmetry breaking. We also provide an example where almost all moduli are fixed.
In this case, only the fibre volume of F-theory, the volume moduli of the two K3s, and
three metric moduli of the lower K3 remain undetermined.
    Section 5 contains a brief discussion of supersymmetry. Generically, we obtain N = 0
vacua of no-scale type. For specific, non-generic choices of the flux matrix, we find three-
dimensional N = 2 or N = 4 supersymmetry. To determine the amount of surviving
supersymmetry, it suffices to know the eigenvalues of the flux matrix restricted to the two
three-planes.
    After summarizing our main results in Section 6, we collect some technical issues in
the appendices. Appendix A contains some basic definitions concerning the geometry of
K3, Appendix B gives the flux potential in terms of the two superpotentials of M-theory
compactifications. Some facts about self-adjoint operators on spaces with indefinite metric
are collected in Appendix C. Finally, Appendix D supplies some further details concerning
the F-theory limit, especially the way in which certain M-theory moduli are lost in the
F-theory limit.


2    K3 Flux Potential
In this chapter we compactify M-theory to three dimensions on K3 × K3 and analyse
the effects of four-form flux. The main new points of our presentation are the following:
We maintain a manifest SO(3) × SO(3) symmetry of the moduli space of K3 × K3 in
the calculation of the potential in Section 2.2. Furthermore, we explicitly derive the flux-
induced masses for the vector fields arising from the three-form C3 in Section 2.3.




                                             5
2.1     M-Theory on K3 × K3
The compactification of M-theory on a generic four-fold is described in detail in [22].
Here we specialise to the case of K3 × K3. To distinguish the two K3’s, we write the
compactification manifold as K3 × K3.f Correspondingly, all quantities related to the
second K3 will have a tilde.
   The relevant M-theory bosonic action is [30]
                        Z                              Z              
                     2π       11 √           1    2     1
               SM = 9        d x −g R − |F4 | −             C3 ∧ F4 ∧ F4
                     ℓM                      2          6
                         Z                   Z                                (2.1)
                         2π                         11 √
                    + 3           C3 ∧ I8 (R) + d x −g J8 (R) ,
                         ℓM

where ℓM is the eleven-dimensional Planck length, F4 = dC3, and I8 (R) and J8 (R) are
polynomials of degree 4 in the curvature tensor [31, 32]. When we compactify on K3 ×
f we obtain a three-dimensional theory with eight supercharges, i.e. N = 4 in three
K3,
dimensions. This can be inferred from the fact that each K3 has holonomy group SU(2)
and correspondingly two invariant spinors.
    Let us analyse the geometric moduli. K3 is a hyper-Kähler manifold: its metric is
defined by three two-forms ωi in H 2 (K3) plus the overall scale. H 2 (K3) is a 22-dimensional
vector space equipped with a natural scalar product,2
                                  Z
                         v·w ≡ v∧w              ∀ v, w ∈ H 2 (K3) ,                      (2.2)
                                      K3

which has signature (3, 19), i.e. there are three positive-norm directions. The three vectors
ωi defining the metric must have positive norm and be orthogonal to each other. Hence
they can be normalised according to ωi · ωj = δij . The Kähler form and holomorphic
two-form and can then be given as
                          √
                     j = 2ν ω3 ,                          ω = ω1 + iω2 .                (2.3)

This definition is not unique: we have an S 2 of possible complex structures and associated
Kähler forms. Each of them defines the same metric, which is then invariant under the
SO(3) that rotates the ωi ’s.
   The motion in moduli space can now be visualised as the motion of the three-plane
Σ spanned by the ωi ’s, which is characterised by the deformations of the ωi preserving
orthonormality. The corresponding δωi are in the subspace orthogonal to Σ, which is 19-
dimensional. Together with the volume, this gives 3 · 19 + 1 = 58 scalars in the moduli
space of one K3. The same parameterisation can be used for the second K3, where the
   2
    Throughout this work, we freely identify forms, their cohomology classes, the Poincaré-dual cycles and
their homology classes.

                                                    6
corresponding scalars are νe and the components of δe
                                                    ωj . Altogether one finds 58 + 58 = 116
scalars from the metric on K3 × K3.f Furthermore, since K3 has no harmonic one-forms,
there are no 3d vectors coming from the metric.

2.2     The Scalar Potential
We now allow for an expectation value for the field strength F4 of the form
                                      hF4 i ≡ G4 = GIΛ ηI ∧ ηeΛ ,                                     (2.4)
                                                                                   f The flux
where {ηI , ηeΛ } (with I, Λ = 1, ..., 22) is an integral basis of H 2 (K3) × H 2 (K3).
                                               3     −3 IΛ
satisfies a (Dirac) quantisation condition : ℓM G ∈ Z. In the following, we will always
denote this type of flux by G4 while the generic four-form field strength will be F4 .
    The flux potential for the moduli is found by reducing the M-theory action. In the
presence of fluxes, the solution to the equations of motion is a warped product of a Calabi–
Yau fourfold and a three-dimensional non-compact space [19, 22, 34]. In the following, we
neglect backreaction and work with the undeformed Calabi–Yau space K3 × K3             f as the
internal manifold. The underlying assumption is that, in analogy to [34], for any zero-
energy minimum of the unwarped potential a corresponding zero-energy warped solution
will always exist. After Weyl rescaling, the potential is given by [24]
                                                                       
                                            Z        p
                               4π 1             8                  ℓ6
                                                         (8) |G |2 − M χ ,
                          V = 9               d   ξ   g       4                         (2.5)
                               ℓM 4V 3                               12
                                                f
                                             K3×K3

where χ is the Euler number of the compact manifold. For K3 × K3, f it is χ = 242 = 576.
Given our previous discussion of K3 moduli space, we expect that (2.5) will be invariant
under SO(3) × SO(3) rotations once we express the metric in terms of ωi and ω ej .
   In the absence of spacetime-filling M2 branes, the cancellation of M2-brane-charge on
the compact manifold K3 × K3 f requires [22]
                                       Z
                                    1                χ
                                     6
                                         G4 ∧ G4 =      .                           (2.6)
                                  2 ℓM              24
This allows us to express the second term in (2.5) through the flux. It is convenient to set
ℓM = 1 and to introduce a volume-independent potential V0 by writing V = V2π3 V0 . Here
V = νe                          f Our result now reads
      ν is the volume of K3 × K3.
                                    Z
                                  1
                             V0 =      (G4 ∧ ∗G4 − G4 ∧ G4 ) ,                         (2.7)
                                  2
                                           f
                                        K3×K3

   3                                                                           p1   4
                                                                     M [G4 ] − 4 ∈ H (Y, Z), where p1 is the
     The precise quantisation condition for a generic fourfold Y is ℓ−3
                                   p1
first Pontryagin class [33]. Since 2 is even for Y = K3 × K3, the quantisation condition becomes simply
             4
  M [G4 ] ∈ H (Y, Z).
ℓ−3

                                                     7
with G4 given by (2.4).
   On K3, each ηI can be split into a sum of two vectors, parallel and perpendicular to
the 3-plane Σ:
                             X                             k
                        ηI =     (ηI · ωi ) ωi + P[ηI ] = ηI + ηI⊥ .              (2.8)
                                      i

Here P is the projector on the subspace orthogonal to Σ. The first term, which corresponds
to the projection on Σ, has been given in a more explicit form using the orthonormal basis
ωi of the Σ plane for later convenience. The two terms of (2.8) represent a selfdual and an
anti-selfdual two-form [23], allowing us to write the Hodge dual of a basis vector as
                                                                 k
                                                  ∗K3 ηI = ηI − ηI⊥ .                                  (2.9)

The same applies to K3. f
    If we insert (2.4) and (2.8) into the expression (2.7) for V0 and we use the relation (2.9)
for the action of the Hodge ∗, we find
                                n                ⊥          ⊥ 
                                   k   k     IΛ          JΣ
                        V0 = − ηI · ηJ G ηeΛ · G ηeΣ
                                             ⊥          ⊥  k k o                     (2.10)
                                   + ηI GIΛ · ηJ GJΣ          ηeΛ · ηeΣ .

Since
                                  k           k
                                                     X
                                 ηI · ηJ =                 (ηI · ωi ) (ηJ · ωi ) ,                    (2.11)
                                                       i

we can write V0 as
              (
                X
       V0 = −      e IΛ (ηI · ωi ) ηeΛ ] · P[G
                   P[G                     e JΣ (ηJ · ωi ) ηeΣ ]
                    i
                                                                                              )       (2.12)
                                      X
                                 +                P[GIΛ (e    ej ) ηI ] · P[GJΣ (ηΣ · ω
                                                         ηΛ · ω                       ej ) ηJ ]   .
                                          j

    To write it in a more compact form, we define two natural homomorphisms G :
     f → H 2 (K3) and Ga : H 2 (K3) → H 2 (K3)
H 2(K3)                                    f by
           Z                                   Z
                        IΛ f    Σ
     G ṽ = G4 ∧ ṽ = (G MΛΣ ṽ ) ηI ,    G v = G4 ∧ v = (v J MJI GIΛ )e
                                           a
                                                                       ηΛ . (2.13)
           f
           K3                                                        K3

                                                  f and MIJ , M
where v = v J ηJ ∈ H 2 (K3), ṽ = ṽ Σ ηeΣ ∈ H 2 (K3)             fΛΣ represent the metrics in
the bases ηI , ηeΛ . The operator Ga is the adjoint of G, i.e. (v · Gṽ) = (Ga v, ṽ). The matrix
                                                                            
components of these operators are GI Σ ≡ GIΛ M    fΛΣ and (Ga )Σ ≡ GT ΣJ MJI .
                                                                   I


                                                             8
       The moduli potential is then given by
                                                                                          !
                            2π         X                      2       X               2
                        V =− 3                     e a ωi ]
                                                   P[G            +        P[G ω
                                                                               ej ]           .   (2.14)
                            V              i                           j

As expected, it is symmetric under SO(3) rotation of the ωi ’s and of the ω         ei ’s4 .
    This potential is positive definite since the metrics for H 2 (K3)f and H 2 (K3) defined in
(2.2) are negative definite on the subspace orthogonal to the ωi ’s and the ω          ei ’s. We note
also that the volumes of the two K3’s are flat directions parameterizing the degeneracy of
the absolute minimum of the potential, in which V = 0.
    We can also rewrite this potential expressing the projectors through the ω’s:
                                                                                      !
            2π        X               X                  X
      V =       3
                   −      kGa ωi k2 −     kG ωe j k2 + 2      ωj · Ga ωi )(ωi · G ω
                                                             (e                   ej ) .       (2.15)
           (νe
             ν)        i               j                 i,j

This is again manifestly symmetric under SO(3) rotations. The potential can also be
expressed in terms of two superpotentials (see Appendix B). We will not need this formu-
lation in the following.
    In (2.4) we have only considered fluxes G4 with two legs on each K3. More generally
the flux could be of this form:
                                        hF4 i = G4 + Gρ + Geρ̃ ,                                  (2.16)

where ρ and ρ̃ are the volume forms on K3 and K3.f 5 To obtain the general potential, we
need to compute ∗ hF4 i. Using our previous result for ∗G4 and the Hodge duals
                                           νe                                  ν
                                 ∗ρ =         ρ̃       and            ∗ ρ̃ =      ρ               (2.17)
                                           ν                                   νe
of ρ and ρ̃, we find
                                       Z
                                π
                       Vnew =                  (F4 ∧ ∗F4 − F4 ∧ F4 )
                                ν )3
                              (νe
                                      f
                                   K3×K3
                                                                               (2.18)
                               2π     1 2 νe        1 e2  ν 
                            =    V0 + G          + G           − G Ge .
                                ν )3
                              (νe     2      ν      2      νe
                                      q
                            ν and ξ = ννe , the potential can be concisely written as
With the substitutions V = νe
                                    (                    2 )
                                2π         1            1
                         Vnew = 3 V0 +         G ξ − Ge        .                   (2.19)
                                V          2            ξ
   4                       e are obviously symmetric as they project onto the space orthogonal to all the
      The projectors P and P
ωi ’s.                    R       R
    5
      The normalisation is K3 ρ = K3f ρ̃ = 1.



                                                         9
This potential is still positive definite and has minima at points where it vanishes, but it
now has only one unavoidable flat direction, the overall volume of K3 × K3.f The ratio of
                          2    e
the volumes is fixed at ξ = G/G.

2.3     Gauge Symmetry Breaking by Flux
In our context, F-theory emerges from the duality between M-theory on K3× K3,      f with K3  f
being elliptically fibred, and type IIB on K3 × T 2 /Z2 × S 1 . The F-theory limit consists
in taking the fibre volume to zero on the M-theory side, and in taking the radius of the
S 1 to infinity on the type IIB side (see Section 3.2 for the details of this limit). Before
analysing the effect of gauge symmetry breaking by fluxes, we recall the different origins
of four-dimensional gauge fields in type IIB and in F-theory.
    Type IIB theory on K3 × T 2 /Z2 contains 16 vectors from gauge theories living on D7
branes and 4 vectors from the reduction of B2 and C2 along one-cycles of T 2 /Z2 . In three
dimensions, one then has 20 three-dimensional gauge fields and 20 scalars corresponding
to Wilson lines along the S 1 . In the F-theory limit, these scalars combine with the vectors
to give the required 20 four-dimensional vector fields.
    In M-theory on K3 × K3, f vectors arise from the reduction of the three-form C3 along
two-cycles in K3 or K3.f Since we are in three dimensions we have the freedom to dualise
some of these vectors, treating them as three-dimensional scalars. To match the type IIB
description, the correct choice is to treat only the fields coming from the reduction of
C3 on two-cycles of K3 f as vectors6 . This reduction gives 22 vectors in three dimensions.
However, since K3 f is elliptically fibred, there are two distinguished two-cycles: the base
and the fibre. They require a special treatment in the F-theory limit and, as a result,
three-dimensional vectors arising from these two cycles do not become four-dimensional
gauge fields in the F-theory limit. Instead, one of them corresponds to the type IIB metric
with one leg on the S 1 , while the other is related to C4 with three legs on T 2 /Z2 × S 1 [25].
We will not consider these two vectors in the following and focus on the remaining 20
three-dimensional vectors associated with the reduction of C3 on generic two-cycles of K3.   f
    Each of these vectors absorbs a three-dimensional scalar (corresponding to a Wilson
line degree of freedom on the type IIB side) to become a four-dimensional vector. These
20 scalars come from the metric moduli space of K3.    f More precisely, 18 arise from the
variations δeω3 of the Kähler form in directions orthogonal to the three-plane and to the
base-fibre subspace7 . The two remaining scalars come from variations δe    ω1 and δe ω2 of the
   6
     A simple intuitive argument for this choice can be given by comparing the seven-dimensional theories
coming from M-theory on K3    f and type IIB on T 2 /Z2 ×S 1 . In M-theory, we have seven-dimensional vectors
associated with two-cycles stretched between the pairs of degeneration loci of the fibre (which characterise
D7 branes). In type IIB, the corresponding vectors come directly from the D7-brane world-volume theories.
The fact that they are associated with branes rather than with pairs of branes is simply a matter of basis
choice in the space of U (1)s.
   7                            f two directions of the three-plane are orthogonal to base and fibre subspace,
     For an elliptically fibred K3,


                                                     10
holomorphic two-form which lie in the base-fibre subspace and are orthogonal to ω       e3 . For
a detailed analysis of the matching of fields on both sides of the duality, see [25].
    Given these preliminaries, it is now intuitively clear why F-theory flux generically breaks
gauge symmetries: The flux induces a potential for the metric moduli, making them mas-
sive. This applies, in particular, to those moduli which become vector degrees of freedom
in four dimensions. Hence, the full four-dimensional vector becomes massive by Lorentz
invariance8 .
    To derive the vector mass term explicitly, we begin by writing C3 in the form
                                                  eΣ ∧ ηeΣ + C flux .
                                  C3 = C1I ∧ ηI + C                                                 (2.20)
                                                    1         3


Here ηI and ηeΣ are basis two-forms on the K3 factors, C1I and C    eΣ are one-form fields in
                                                                     1
three dimensions, and C3flux is the contribution responsible for the four-form flux (which is
only locally defined). As before, the flux
                                         R is given  by G4 = GIΣ ηI ∧ ηeΣ = dC flux
                                                                             R 3 .2
                                               2
    In the reduction of the action, the |F4 | term leads to the flux term |G4 | (which is
irrelevant for our present discussion) and to kinetic terms for C1I and C eΣ . The metric for
                                                                           1
the kinetic terms is given by
                     Z                  Z                    
                                             k    k    ⊥    ⊥
                        ηI ∧ ∗8 ηJ = νe     ηI ∧ ηJ − ηI ∧ ηJ = νe gIJ ,               (2.21)
                        f
                     K3×K3                 K3
                        Z                      Z                           
                                                       k     k
                            ηeΛ ∧ ∗8 ηeΣ = ν         ηeΛ ∧ ηeΣ − ηeΛ⊥ ∧ ηeΣ⊥ = ν g̃ΛΣ .             (2.22)
                        f
                     K3×K3                     f
                                               K3

We have split off the volume dependence, so that gIJ and g̃ΛΣ are dimensionless. Note
that these metrics are positive definite since the subspace orthogonal to the three-plane
has negative-definite metric. Note also that there is no kinetic mixing between the C1I and
              R
    e Σ since ηI ∧ ∗8 ηeΣ = 0.
the C 1                                        R
   We now turn to the Chern–Simons term C3 ∧ RF4 ∧ F4 . Evaluating this term with
C3 of the form (2.20), we see that the contribution C3flux ∧ F4 ∧ F4 vanishes: C3flux has
                     f so F4 ∧ F4 would need to have three legs on R1,2 and five legs on
three legs on K3 × K3,
K3 × K3.f This is, however, inconsistent with (2.20). The other contributions give
                     Z                  Z                           
                                                     I eΣ     e Σ  I
                        C3 ∧ F4 ∧ F4 =     2GIΣ C1 dC1 + C1 dC1 .                    (2.23)
                                                R1,2

while ωe3 has a component along the base-fibre subspace. This explains the above number of independent
variations as 18 = 22 − (3 + 2 − 1). The variation of ω
                                                      e3 within the base-fibre subspace corresponds to part
of the metric in the F-theory limit.
    8
      Correspondingly in type IIB, putting two-form flux on certain cycles of wrapped D7 branes breaks the
gauge symmetry of the brane [26–29].



                                                       11
Thus, the flux matrix GIΣ = MIJ GJΛ MfΛΣ couples C I and C eΣ . (Note that flux proportional
                                                    1       1
to the volume forms of K3 and K3 f would, in addition, lead to couplings ∼ C I dC J and
                                                                                  1   1
∼C eΣ dC
       eΛ .)
    1    1
    We have now arrived at the three-dimensional effective action
                           Z 
                      (3)                                   eΛ ∧ ∗dCeΣ
                    SC =       νegIJ dC1I ∧ ∗dC1J + νg̃ΛΣ dC 1       1
                            R1,2
                                                                                        (2.24)
                                      2                         
                                                  eΛ + C
                                     + GIΛ C1I ∧ dC    eΛ ∧ dC I              .
                                                    1    1    1
                                      3

As explained before, only the vectors C  eΣ become four-dimensional vectors in the F-theory
                                          1
limit [25]. It is convenient to dualise the remaining vectors C1I , replacing them by scalars
C0I . To this end, we turn the equation of motion,
                                                         
                                      I   2 1 IJ      e Σ
                              d ∗dC1 +         g GJΣ dC 1   = 0,                       (2.25)
                                          3 νe
into a Bianchi identity by defining C0I through
                                             2 1 IJ     e1Σ = dC0I .
                                   ∗dC1I +        g GJΣ C                                (2.26)
                                             3 νe
It follows that the C0I have to transform non-trivially under the gauge transformations of
the CeΣ:
       1

              eΣ −→ C
                    eΣ + dΛΣ ,                                         2 1 IJ
              C 1     1    0                            C0I −→ C0I +        g GJΣ ΛΣ
                                                                                   0 .   (2.27)
                                                                       3 νe
In other words, the vectors C eΣ gauge shift symmetries of the scalars C I , with the charges
                               1                                         0
determined by the flux.
     The equation of motion of C0I follows formally from ddC1I = 0, the Bianchi identity of
C1I . Since ∗∗ = −1 on R1,2 , we find
                                                                       
                          I              I           I   2 1 IJ     e Σ
                  0 = ddC1 = −d ∗ ∗dC1 = d ∗ dC0 −            g GJΣ C1 .               (2.28)
                                                         3 νe
We now want to find a gauge invariant action from which this equation of motion can be
derived. Such an action is given by
                      Z            (                                       )
                                                                         2
                             √            2            2  1
             SCdual =    d3 x −g3 ν dC e1Σ + νe dC0I −               e1Σ
                                                            g IJ GJΣ C       .   (2.29)
                                                       3 νe
                     R1,2

The corresponding Einstein-Hilbert term has the usual volume prefactor and can be
brought to canonical form by a Weyl rescaling of the three-dimensional metric. This gives

                                                   12
the kinetic term of the vectors a prefactor (νe
                                              ν )ν, which we can absorb in a redefinition of
e Σ
C1 . The resulting mass matrix has the form
                                            1
                                 m2ΣΛ ∼        3 GIΣ GJΛ g
                                                           IJ
                                                              ,                         (2.30)
                                          (νe
                                            ν)
which is positive semidefinite since g IJ is a positive definite metric. The number of gauge
fields which become massive is determined by the rank of the flux matrix. Comparing with
Eq. (2.14), we see that the masses are of the same order as the masses of the flux stabilised
geometric moduli. This confirms the intuitive idea put forward at the beginning of this
section: The vectors C eΣ and some geometric moduli are combined in the F-theory limit
                        1
to produce four-dimensional vectors. For this to work in the presence of fluxes, both the
three-dimensional vectors and scalars need to have the same flux-induced masses.


3     Moduli Stabilisation
In this section we turn to the flux stabilisation of moduli. First, we will analyse under which
conditions the potential (2.14) has minima at V = 0, and whether there are flat directions.
Then we will see which restrictions we have to impose in order to map the M-theory
situation to F-theory, and discuss possible implications for gauge symmetry breaking.
    Let us first comment on the flux components which are proportional to the volume
forms. In what follows, we do not consider these components, in other words, we set
G = Ge = 0. The reason is that we want to end up with a Lorentz-invariant four-dimensional
theory. By going through the M-theory/F-theory duality explicitly, one can see that this
requires that the flux needs to have exactly one leg in the fibre torus and hence two legs
along each K3. Thus, we can without loss of generality use a flux in the form of Eq. (2.4),
and the associated potential (2.14).

3.1    Minkowski Minima
Clearly, the potential (2.14) cannot stabilise the volumes ν and νe. They are runaway
directions in general, and flat directions exactly if the term in brackets vanishes. This
term is a sum of positive definite terms, so each of these must vanish if we want to realise a
minimum with vanishing energy. Since each term contains a projection onto the subspace
orthogonal to the three-planes spanned by the ωi ’s and ω   ei ’s, the bracket clearly vanishes
if and only if the flux homomorphisms map the three-planes into each other, though not
necessarily bijectively:
                         e ⊂ Σ,
                        GΣ                                          e.
                                                             Ga Σ ⊂ Σ                     (3.1)

Note that what is required is not merely the existence of three-dimensional subspaces which
are mapped to each other, but that both subspaces are positive-norm. If the metrics were

                                              13
positive definite, this condition would be trivial since
                                                      any
                                                          real matrix can be diagonalised
                                      2             2 f
by choosing appropriate bases in H (K3) and H K3 .
    We will now show that the conditions (3.1) are equivalent to the conditions that the
map Ga G is diagonalisable and all its eigenvalues are real and non-negative9 .
    Let us assume that there exist two three-planes Σ and Σ  e such that the relations (3.1)
                                                                                   2
hold. The cohomology
                  groups can be decomposed into orthogonal subspaces, H (K3) =
Σ ⊕ R and H 2 K3  f =Σ    e ⊕ R,
                               e such that the metric (2.2) defined by the wedge product is
positive (negative) definite on Σ and Σ e (R and R).
                                                  e The conditions (3.1) imply that G and
  a
G are block-diagonal, i.e. we also have GR   e ⊂ R and Ga R ⊂ R.  e It is then obvious that
                            a        10
the selfadjoint operator G G obeys
                                                   e ⊂Σ
                                               Ga GΣ  e.                                                (3.2)

As each block is selfadjoint relative to definite metrics, Ga G is diagonalisable with real and
non-negative eigenvalues.
    We now show that the converse also holds. Assume that Ga G is diagonalisable with
non-negative eigenvalues11 . This defines a decomposition of H 2 (K3)  f in Σ e ⊕ R,
                                                                                   e where Σ  e
is the three-dimensional subspace given by the eigenvectors with positive norm. The fact
that Ga G maps Σ e into itself implies that G maps positive norm vectors into positive norm
vectors: Indeed, give ẽ ∈ Σ,

                                     (Gẽ · Gẽ) = (Ga Gẽ · ẽ) ≥ 0 ,                                  (3.3)

                                                  e then we can define Σ as the image of
If Ga G|Σe is invertible (non-zero eigenvalues in Σ),
G|Σe . The fact that Σe is invariant under Ga G implies that the image of Ga |Σ is Σ
                                                                                   e and (3.1)
                                  a
is proved. The case in which G G has non-trivial kernel does not present any complication.
Since the kernel of Ga G coincides with the kernel of G 12 , the image of G|Σe is no more
three dimensional. One then defines Σ as the image of G|Σe plus the positive norm vectors
in the kernel of Ga .
    To summarise, the conditions (3.1) are equivalent to the condition that Ga G is diago-
nalisable and all its eigenvalues are real and non-negative. In this case (see Appendix C)
                                 
   9
      Note that Ga G maps H 2 K3  f onto itself, so it makes sense to speak of eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Note also, however, that although Ga G is a selfadjoint operator, this does not imply that its eigenvalues
are real since the metric is indefinite. We have collected some facts about linear algebra on spaces with
indefinite metric in Appendix C.
   10
      Similarly G Ga obeys G Ga Σ ⊂ Σ.
   11
      In this case, because of the non-degeneracy of the inner product, there alway exists a basis of non-null
eigenvectors.
   12
      Since G and Ga are adjoint to each other, there is an orthogonal decomposition H 2 (K3) = Im G ⊕
Ker Ga . Take ẽ ∈ Ker Ga G; since Gẽ is both in Im G and in Ker Ga , it is the zero vector, proving that
ẽ ∈ Ker G.


                                                     14
the matrices for Ga G, G and Ga take the form
                                                        
    (Ga G)d = diag a21 , a22 , a23 , b21 , . . . , b219   Gd = Gad = diag(a1 , a2 , a3 , b1 , . . . , b19 )   (3.4)

in appropriate bases, where a2i are the eigenvalues of Ga G relative to positive norm eigen-
vectors, while b2c are relative to negative norm eigenvectors.

    Finally, we want to see whether there are flat directions. The potential has a flat
direction, if there are infinitesimally different positions of the three-planes Σ,     e Σ which
                                                            a
give Minkowski minima. Given a flux (such that G G is diagonalizable with positive
eigenvalues), the minima correspond to Σ     e (Σ) generated by the positive norm eigenvectors
     a         a
of G G (G G ). If all the eigenvalues are different from each other, there can be only
three positive norm eigenvectors, and the minimum is isolated. If a positive norm and a
negative norm eigenvector have the same eigenvalue, e.g. a1 = b1 , then a flat direction
arises: Any three-dimensional space spanned by ṽa2 , ṽa3 and ṽa′ 1 = ṽa1 + ǫ ũb1 (ǫ ≪ 1) will
                 e that still satisfies the conditions (3.1). It is easy to see that an analogous
give a different Σ
flat direction develops for Σ. Note that if some ai are degenerate then the rotation of the
vectors does not move the three-planes.
    This shows that flat directions of the potential are absent if and only if the sets of
eigenvalues {a2i } and {b2a } are pairwise distinct.

3.2      F-Theory Limit
We are interested in stabilising points in the moduli space of K3× K3  f which can be mapped
to F-theory. This means we require that K3   f is an elliptic fibration over a base CP1 , and
that the fibre volume vanishes.
   The first requirement means that K3   f needs to have two elements B      e (the base) and Fe
(the fibre) in the Picard group, i.e. two integral (1,1)-cycles, whose intersection matrix is
                                                  
                                            −2 1
                                                      .                                    (3.5)
                                             1 0
                                                               
Note that by a change of basis from B,     e Fe to B    e + Fe, Fe , this intersection matrix is
equivalent to one U block in the general form (A.1) of the metric in an integral basis.
   As (1,1)-cycles, B  e and Fe must be orthogonal to the holomorphic two-form. In our
case                       e
D this E means that the Σ plane has a two-dimensional subspace orthogonal orthogonal to
  e Fe . This subspace is spanned by the real and imaginary part of the holomorphic two-
  B,
                                          D      E
form ωe=ω  e1 + ie                          e  e
                 ω2 . On the other hand, B, F contains the third positive-norm direction,
                                     D      E
so ω
   e3 cannot be also orthogonal to B,  e Fe . For the following discussion it is convenient to


                                                         15
consider directly the Kähler form e
                                   j instead of νe and ω
                                                       e3 separately. The Kähler form can
be parametrised as
                                        e    e + f Fe + ca ũa ,
                                        j = bB                                                       (3.6)

where ũa is an orthonormal basis (i.e. ũa · ũb = −δab ) of the space orthogonal to Fe, B
                                                                                          e and
e . This is the most general form of e
ω                                    j for an elliptically fibred K3.f

    Now we turn to the second requirement: the fibre must have vanishing volume. This
is what is called the F-theory limit. For the Kähler form (3.6), we find the volumes of the
fibre and the base to be13
                                                    
                    e     e  e
                 ρ F = j · F = b,                   ρ Be =e  j·Be = f − 2b .           (3.7)

Hence, the F-theory limit involves b → 0, and in this limit, the base volume will be given
                                                   f is
by f . On the other hand, the volume of the entire K3
                                     1e e                 1
                                       j · j = b (f − b) − ca ca .                                   (3.8)
                                     2                    2
This volume is required to be positive, so we get a bound on the ca ,
                                          1 a a
                                            c c < b (f − b) .                                        (3.9)
                                          2
                                                                                          √
Thus, in the F-theory limit we have to take the ca to zero at least as fast as                b. Once the
                              f vanishes and the Kähler form is given by
limit is taken, the volume of K3

                                                j = f Fe ,
                                                e                                                   (3.10)

regardless of the initial value of the ca . Note that the constraint (3.9) is consistent with
the intuitive picture of the fibre torus shrinking simultaneously in both directions: The ca
measure the volume of cycles which have one leg in the fibre and one in the base, so they
shrink like the square root of the fibre volume b.
    The Kähler moduli space is reduced in the F-theory limit: We lose not only the direction
along which we take the limit, but also all transverse directions except for the base volume
f , which becomes the single Kähler modulus of the torus orbifold. In the duality to type
IIB on K3 × T 2 /Z2 × S 1 , the ca parametrise Wilson lines of the gauge fields along the
  13
    More generally the volume of a two-cycle C2 is given by the projection on the three-plane Σ, multiplied
by the K3 volume:                             v
                                              u 3
                                              uX
                              ρ (C2 ) = ν 1/2 t (ωi · C2 )2 = ν 1/2 kC2 |Σ k .
                                               i=1




                                                     16
S 1 as long as the fibre volume is finite. In the F-theory limit, which corresponds to the
radius of the S 1 going to infinity, the Wilson lines disappear from the moduli space. The
propapagating degrees of freedom related to them combine with the three-dimensional
vectors from the three-form C3 reduced along two-cycles of K3       f to form four-dimensional
vectors (cf. Section 2.3, see also [25]).
    From this perspective, we see that it is important not to fix the modulus controlling the
size of the fibre. In fact, if we leave it unfixed, we have a line in the M-theory moduli space
corresponding to this flat direction of the potential. Of this line, only the point at infinity
(b = 0) corresponds to F-theory. This limit is singular in the sense that the F-theory point
is not strictly speaking in the moduli space of K3,   f but on its boundary. As we show in
Appendix D, this point is at infinite distance from every other point in the moduli space
of e
   j, and it actually corresponds to the decompactification limit in type IIB.
    To see which fluxes are compatible with this limit, we first note that there must be
no flux along either B   e or Fe because Lorentz invariance of the four-dimensional theory
requires
       that
            the flux must have exactly one leg along the fibre. This means that in a basis
     2 f                      e Fe and orthogonal forms, the flux matrix must be of the form
of H K3 consisting of B,
                                                       
                                       0       0
                                       ..     ..       


                                                    *
                                   IΣ
                                  G = .        .       .                              (3.11)
                                            0 0
                  a
This leads to a G G with two rows and columns of zeroes,
                                                  
                                       0 0 ... 0
                                      0 0 . . . 0
                                                  
                               Ga G =  .. ..      ,                                   (3.12)


                                                    *
                                      . .         
                                       0 0

hence the direction along which we take the F-theory limit is automatically flat.
     To discuss the matrix form of G, it is convenient to choose an equivalent basis for
   2
H (K3), i.e. a basis containing B and F and 20 orthogonal vectors. We then restrict to
fluxes of the type
                                                    
                                          0 0
                                                 0 
                                GIΣ = 0 0             ,                          (3.13)
                                           0 GF-th
                                                 IΛ


although this is not the most general form. Here, GIΣ
                                                   F-th is a 20 × 20 matrix which we will
           IΣ
also call G for simplicity.



                                              17
4      Brane Localisation
One of our aims is to find a flux that fixes a given configuration of branes. The results
obtained so far allow us to do that: As we will review in the next subsection, the positions
of the D7 branes are encoded in the complex structure ω    e = ω e1 + ie     f [21]. This
                                                                       ω2 of K3
can be understood as follows: We can find certain cycles which measure the distance
between branes. A given brane configuration can thus be characterised by the volumes
of such cycles. Most relevant for the low-energy theory is the question whether there are
brane stacks (corresponding to gauge enhancement) which is signalled by the vanishing
of interbrane cycles. So choosing a given brane configuration determines a set of integral
cycles which are to shrink, i.e. which should be orthogonal to the complex structure14 . We
want to find what is the flux that fixes such a complex structure.
    The flux needs to satisfy some constraints: It must be integral and it must satisfy
the tadpole cancellation condition (2.6). The first condition means that the entries of the
flux matrix GIΣ in a basis of integral cycles must be integers. The tadpole cancellation
condition translates into a condition on the trace of Ga G,
                                                     f = 48 .
                                    tr Ga G = tr GTMGM                                              (4.1)

Of course, we also require that the flux gives Minkowski minima, i.e. Ga G needs to have
only non-negative eigenvalues. These conditions turn out to be rather restrictive, and a
scan of all 20 × 20-matrices is computationally beyond our reach. Fortunately, the block-
diagonal structure alluded to above allows us to restrict to smaller submatrices of size 2 × 2
or 3 × 3, where an exhaustive scan is feasible.

4.1     D-Brane Positions and Complex Structure
In the weak coupling limit, in which the F-theory background can be described by per-
turbative type IIB theory, the complex structure deformations of the upper K3 have an
interpretation in terms of the movement of D-branes and O-planes on CP1 [13]. From the
                                       f D-branes and O-planes are points on the CP1
perspective of the elliptically fibred K3,
                   2
base where the T fibre degenerates. The positions of these points are encoded in the
                      f The 18 complex structure deformations15 specify the 16 D-brane
complex structure of K3:
positions, the complex structure of T 2 /Z2 ∼ CP1 , and the value of the complex dilaton.
The map between the two descriptions is worked out in detail in [21]. In the following, we
summarise the basic results.
                                         f surface develops singularities which reflect the
    When several D-branes coincide, the K3
corresponding gauge enhancement [35–40]. These singularities can also be seen to arise
  14
     These are cycles with one leg in the base and one in the fibre and which are orthogonal to ω
                                                                                                e3 once we
take the F-theory limit (3.10).
  15
     These are the deformations of ωe1 and ωe2 in the space orthogonal to Fe and B.
                                                                                  e


                                                   18
when the volume of certain cycles shrinks to zero:
                            Z       Z
                               e = γi ∧ ω
                               ω           e = γi · ω
                                                    e −→ 0 .                                         (4.2)
                                  γi      f
                                          K3

Note that these cycles have one leg on the base√ and and one leg on the fibre torus, so
γi · e
     j = 0 16 . Hence their volume is given by νe |γi · ω
                                                        e |. If the γi are integral cycles (for
the structure of integral cycles on K3 see Appendix A) with self-intersection −2, their
shrinking produces a singularity that corresponds to a gauge enhancement. Since these
cycles can be thought of as measuring distances between branes, this is equivalent to D-
branes that are coinciding. The Cartan matrix that displays the gauge enhancement is
given by the intersection matrix of the shrinking γi .
                                              f degenerates to T 4 /Z2 . From the D-brane
     Let us consider an SO(8)4 point at which K3
perspective this corresponds to putting four D-branes on each of the four O-planes. In
terms of the basis given in Appendix A, the complex structure of K3   f is given by
                                      1
                            eSO(8)4 = (α + Ue2 + Sβ − USe1 ) .
                            ω                                                             (4.3)
                                      2
For the sake of brevity we have introduced17
                                   
            α ≡ 2 e1 + e1 + WI1 EI ,                      β ≡ 2(e2 + e2 + WI2 EI ) ,      (4.4)
where
                                     
                        1 4 1
                              4
                                4 1
                                    4                                                
                     W = 0 , ,0 ,                    and       W 2 = 1, 07 , 1, 07                   (4.5)
                            2     2
describe the mixing of cycles from the U and E8 blocks. Note that they can be interpreted
as Wilson lines, breaking E8 × E8 to SO(8)4 in the duality to heterotic string theory.
The cycles that are dual to the forms ei , α and β are shown in Figure 1. The parameter U
describes the positions of the four O-planes, which is equivalent to the complex structure of
the T 2 in type IIB before orientifolding. The dilaton, which is constant in this configuration,
is given by the complex structure of the fibre torus, S.
    One can check that the cycles which have vanishing periods at an SO(8)4 point span
the lattice D44 . They are given by
                     A                   B                     C                 D
          1       E7 − E8            −E15 + E16          −e2 − E1 + E2     e2 + E9 − E10
          2       E6 − E7            −E14 + E15            −E2 + E3          E10 − E11               (4.6)
          3    −e1 − E5 − E6       e1 + E13 + E14          −E3 + E4          E11 − E12
          4       E5 − E6            −E13 + E14            −E3 − E4          E11 + E12 .
  16
           we areEinterested in the F-theory limit, we will only consider vacua corresponding to e
     Since D                                                                                     j being in
             e e
the block F , B .
  17                                                          f we omit the tildes to avoid unnecessary
     Note that although ei , ei , EI , α and β are forms on K3,
notational clutter.

                                                    19
                                                  e2


                                         C                 A

                                     β                                α



                                         D                  B


                                                   e1



     Figure 1: For an SO(8)4 configuration, the two degrees of freedom of the O-planes and the
     dilaton are encoded in cycles that surround two of the four blocks in the CP1 base and wrap
     an arbitrary direction in the fibre torus. The four SO(8) blocks are denoted by A,B,C and D.
     The four cycles displayed here form a basis that is dual to the four forms ei , α and β. Note
     that we also have indicated the fibre part of each cycle.



   These cycles can be constructed geometrically. Their projections to the base CP1
connect the D-branes and are displayed for one block in Figure 2.
                     3
                                                                  3
                                 2        1
                                                                           2     1
                                                                  4
                     4
                           (a)                                            (b)

     Figure 2: (a) The assignment between the geometrically constructed cycles between D-branes
     and the cycles that are given in the table above. This assignment is the same for each of
     the four SO(8) blocks. The cross marks the position of the O plane, grey dots denote the
     D7 branes. Due to the fibre involution in the O-plane monodromy, cycles 3 and 4 do not
     intersect. (b) The corresponding gauge enhancement: The cycles become the nodes of the
     Dykin diagram, lines are drawn for intersections.



   We can now move away from the SO(8)4 configuration by rotating ω
                                                                  e . A convenient
parameterisation is given by
                         1                                   
                                                          bI zI ,
                    ω
                    e=      α + Ue2 + Sβ − US − z 2 e1 + 2E                  (4.7)
                         2



                                                  20
                                   bI = EI + W 1 e1 + W 2 e2 . Explicitly, they are
with shifted E8 × E8 block vectors E          I        I

                       b1 = E1 + e2 ,
                       E                       bI = EI ,
                                               E                I = 2..4, 10..12 ,
                                                                                         (4.8)
                       b9 = E9 + e2 ,
                       E                       bJ = EJ + e1 /2, J = 5..8, 13..16 .
                                               E

The E bI are orthogonal to α and β and still satisfy E bI · E
                                                            bJ = −δIJ . Using Table (4.6) and
Figure 2, one can show [21] that the zI are the positions of the branes relative to their
respective O-planes in the double cover of CP1 ≃ T 2 /Z2 .
    Now we can deduce the brane positions and the gauge enhancement from a given
expansion of the holomorphic two-form ω      e (which is equivalent to knowing the complex
               f
structure of K3). We can either match any expansion of ω    e in the basis given in Appendix A
to (4.7), or we can compute the intersection numbers between ω       e and the cycles given in
                                                  f
Table 4.6 to find the periods of the cycles of K3. In this way we obtain the value of the
dilaton and the D-brane and O-plane positions. Note that contrary to the basis given by
α, β, e1, e2 and the cycles in Table (4.6), the basis we used in the expansion (4.7) is not an
integral basis (as the EbI are half-integral).


4.2       Fixing D7-brane Configurations by Fluxes
We are now ready to outline a systematic procedure for choosing a flux which fixes a
given D7-brane gauge group. In particular, we will be interested in non-Abelian gauge
enhancement. The Cartan matrix of the underlying Lie-Algebra is given by the intersection
matrix of the lattice of shrinking two-cycles. Thus, we need to understand which fluxes
make a particular subspaceD    ofE two-cycles shrink. We will take these cycles as part of
                            e  e
the basis orthogonal to B, F discussed at the end of Section 3. Then we consider the
orthogonal lattice,
              D      i.e.
                      E the lattice made up of (integral) cycles orthogonal to the shrinking
                 e  e
ones (and to B, F ). Choosing an integral basis for this lattice completes the basis of
                                   D     E
              f                      e e
cycles of H2 (K3) orthogonal to B, F . Note that in this basis the metric on H2 (K3)  f is
block-diagonal, with a negative definite block for the subspace of shrinking cycles. We also
choose a basis of integral cycles of H2 (K3) such that the metric has two blocks with the
same dimensions as on the K3  f side.
    In this basis it is easy to write down a flux that fixes ωe orthogonal to the shrinking
                                                         18
cycles: It can be taken to have the block-diagonal form
                                                   
                                          G⊥
                                                      .                                 (4.9)
                                               Gshk
Thus, when diagonalising Ga G, the positive norm eigenvectors are in the first block and
hence orthogonal to the shrinking cycles.
 18
      Actually, it is enough that Ga G is of this form.

                                                      21
   One has finally to check whether there are more shrinking cycles than those we imposed.

4.3    Fixing an SO(8)4 Point
In this section, we will follow the procedure described in the previous section to construct
a flux that fixes the F-theory moduli corresponding to four D7 branes on top of each O7
plane. This SO(8)4 configuration is realised when there are sixteen shrinking cycles whose
intersection matrix is D44 . These shrinking cycles are given by the four blocks A, B, C, D as
defined in (4.6). The basis of the orthogonal lattice is given by α, e1 , β, e2 (see Eq. (4.4)).
Since the only nonvanishing intersections in this set are α · e1 = β · e2 = 2, the intersection
matrix is
                                                          
                                          0 2
                                        2 0               
                                                          
                                  f=
                                  M             0  2       .                            (4.10)
                                                          
                                               2 0        
                                                       D44
For K3 we choose the same basis. Note that we are ignoring the U block spanned by base
and fibre.
   Then we take the 20 × 20 flux matrix with respect to these bases to be
                                                    
                                        G1
                              GIΛ =        G2       ,                         (4.11)
                                                 016
where G1 and G2 are 2×2 blocks (which form the G⊥ of (4.9)) and the zero block is 16×16
(Gshk of (4.9)). If G1 and G2 satisfy the condition to have minima, then one ω       ej is fixed
along the space hα, e1 i, while the other is fixed in the space hβ, e2 i. This immediately gives
a complex structure ω e that is orthogonal to the D44 blocks A, B, C, D and hence realises
an SO(8)4 point.
    An explicit example of an integral flux that satisfies the tadpole cancellation condition
(tr GaG = 48) and fixes an SO(8)4 point is given by:
                                                                      
                                1 1                              1 1
                      G1 =              ,                G2 =              .              (4.12)
                                1 1                              1 3
The corresponding blocks for Ga G are
                                                                             
                a          8 8                               a         16 24
              (G G)1 =             ,                  (G G)2 =                      ,      (4.13)
                           8 8                                         8 16
and the corresponding eigenvalues are
                                                      √                         √
        λωe1 = 16 ,    λũ1 = 0 ,      λωe2 = 8(2 +       3) ,   λũ4 = 8(2 −       3) .   (4.14)

                                              22
We see that their sum is precisely 48, as required by tadpole cancellation, and that they
are all non-negative, as required by the minimum condition. Moreover, the ones corre-
sponding to positive norm eigenvectors are different from those relative to negative norm
eigenvectors, as required by the stabilisation condition.
    The positive norm eigenvectors of the two matrices give ω
                                                            e1 , ω
                                                                 e2 :
                         α e1                                    β   1 e2
                  ω
                  e1 =     + ,                       e2 = 31/4
                                                     ω             + 1/4   .           (4.15)
                         2  2                                    2 3     2
From the comparison of ω  e=ω e1 + ieω2 with the general form (4.7), we see that indeed the
complex structure is fixed at a (non-integral) point where zI = 0, and that the complex
structures of base and fibre are given by
                             1                                    √
                                                                  4
                         U= √
                            4
                                i,                          S=        3i.              (4.16)
                              3
Since S is the type IIB axiodilaton, we have stabilised the string coupling at a moder-
ately small value of 3−1/4 ∼ = 0.76. However, we can probably realise smaller coupling by
considering generic 4 × 4 matrices rather than the 2 × 2 block structure of Eq. (4.11).
    This flux fixes also the deformations of ω1 and ω2 . On the other hand, ω3 and ω    e3 are
                     a        a
eigenvectors of G G and G G relative to zero eigenvalues. Then their deformation along
all negative eigenvectors relative to zero eigenvalues are left unfixed. In type IIB, this
corresponds to leaving unfixed Kähler moduli of K3 × T 2 /Z2 , while fixing the complex
structure and the D7-brane positions. The unfixed deformations of ω     e3 correspond to gauge
fields in type IIB that remain massless [25]. In the studied case, two√of the 19 × 2 defor-
mations of ω3 and ω  e3 , the ones along ũ4 , are fixed (as λũ4 = 8(2 − 3) is different from
zero). Fixing a deformation of ω e3 corresponds to giving a mass to the corresponding gauge
field in type IIB dual. In fact, this flux corresponds to the type IIB flux that makes one
four-dimensional vector massive [26–29]. One can see this also from the M-theory point of
view: One three-dimensional vector gets a mass from fluxes. This vector combines with
the deformation of ω e3 to give a four-dimensional massive vector.
    Finally we note that the lower K3 is generically non-singular, as ω3 will generically not
be orthogonal to the E8 block cycles.

   As a second example we will reproduce one of the solutions given in [20] by using our
methods. As it is discussed there, attractive K3 surfaces are classified in terms of a matrix
                                                    
                                           p·p p·q
                                   Q=                   ,                              (4.17)
                                           p·q q·q

                                                                     f is then given by
in which p and q are integral two-forms. The holomorphic two-form of K3

                                        ω
                                        e = p̃ + τ q̃ .                                (4.18)

                                              23
Of the 13 pairs of attractive K3’s given in [20], we will discuss the one defined by
                                                              
                                8 4                e=      4  2
                         Q=             ,          Q               .                 (4.19)
                                4 8                        2 4

This pair has the advantage that both K3’s have an orientifold interpretation which means
that we can expand p̃ and q̃ in terms of e1 , e2 , α and β (and similarly, for the lower K3,
p and q in terms of e′1 , e′2 , α′ and β ′). Clearly, there are many ways to do this which
correspond to different embeddings of the lattice spanned by p and q into the lattice
spanned by e1 , e2 , α and β. We make the following choice:

                               p =e′1 + 2α′ + 2β ′ , p̃ =e1 + α + β ,
                                                                                                 (4.20)
                               q =e′2 + 2β ′ ,       q̃ =e2 + β .

According to [20], stabilization at this point occurs through the flux
                                          1            
                                    G=      γω ∧ ω
                                                 e+γω∧ω
                                                      e                                          (4.21)
                                          2
with γ = 1 + √i3 . In the basis given by α, e1 , β, e2 and α′ , e′1 , β ′ , e′2 , the flux matrix reads
                                                               
                                            2  2          2   0
                                           1  1          1   0
                                    GIΛ = 
                                          0
                                                                .                               (4.22)
                                               0          2   2
                                           −1 −1          0   1

    The positive norm eigenvectors of Ga G are given by ω       e1 = (1, 1, 21 , − 12 ) and ω
                                                                                            e2 =
(0, 0, 1, 1). Rescaling
                √
                          the second one so that they both have the same norm, we arrive
                  3
at ω̃ = ω e1 + i 2 ωe2 . This is precisely the same result as what one obtains from inserting
(4.20) into (4.18).
    The eigenvalues of Ga G are λωe1 = λωe2 = 24, λũ1 = λũ2 = 0. In the last section we will
see that this corresponds to an N = 1 (4d) vacuum. Moreover, in this case all the Kähler
moduli of both K3’s are left unfixed by fluxes, as all the eigenvalues ba are equal to zero.

4.4     Moving Branes by Fluxes
Now we want to see how to change the flux (4.11), with G1 and G2 given by (4.12), to fix a
different D7-brane configuration in which some D7 branes have been moved away from the
orientifold planes. In particular, we will find fluxes that fix configurations where we move
one or two branes off one of the stacks, breaking one SO(8) to SO(6) or SO(4) × SU(2).
In the following we will consider only the C-block. The cycles belonging to blocks A, B, D
will remain shrunk.


                                                   24
SO(8)3 × SO(6)
Moving one D7 brane from one stack in type IIB corresponds to blowing up one of the
4 cycles of this block. For the first example, consider the complex structure determined
by (4.7) with z1 = d and al other zI = 0. One can check that all cycles given in Table 4.6
except C1 remain orthogonal to ω     e . Looking at Figure 2, it is clear that this means we
have moved one D-brane away from the O-plane, as claimed. Thus SO(8) is broken to
SO(6). At the same time the cycles that remain shrunk in block C have an intersection
matrix that is equivalent to minus the Cartan matrix of SO(6). This means that we have
effectively crossed out the first line and the first column of the Cartan matrix of SO(8) by
removing C1 from the set of shrunk cycles:
                                            
                          −2 1         0   0                       
                         1 −2 1                        −2   1    1
                                          1 −→  1 −2 0  .
                        0                                                             (4.23)
                                 1 −2 0 
                                                         1   0 −2
                           0     1     0 −2

We want an integral basis in which shrunk and blown-up cycles do not intersect each other.
To achieve this we keep the shrunk cycles C2 , C3 , C4 and instead of C1 we take the integral
cycle 2Eb1 = 2 (e2 + E1 ) (see (4.8)) to describe the brane motion in block C. We find the
intersection matrix
                                                       
                                      −4 0       0    0
                                     0 −2 1          1
                                                       .                             (4.24)
                                    0      1 −2 0 
                                       0    1    0 −2

We choose an analogous basis for the lower K3.

                              b1 , C2 , C3 , C4 , A, B, D, is the one that gives the flux matrix the
   The basis α, e1 , β, e2 , 2E
block-diagonal form (4.9), with the shrinking cycles given by C2 , C3 , C4 , A, B, D and the
orthogonal ones by α, e1 , β, e2, 2E  b1 . Such a block-diagonal flux matrix generally gives ω   ea
component along E b1 . An example is given by:
                                                                   
                                              1 1
                                            1 1                    
                                                                   
                                                     1 1 0         
                                    IΛ
                                  G =                             .                        (4.25)
                                                      1  3   1      
                                                                   
                                                     0 1 0         
                                                                015

                                                             b1 for both K3’s. From the type
where the 3 × 3 block is with respect to the cycles β, e2 , 2E
IIB perspective, we are also turning on fluxes on the D7 branes.

                                                25
    Ga G satisfies the tadpole cancellation condition. The eigenvalues corresponding to the
first block are the same as in Eq. (4.14), the ones in the second block are

                        λωe2 = 24.6 ,          λũ2 = 5.5 ,    λũ4 = 1.9 .             (4.26)

They are all positive and different from each other. The positive norm eigenvectors give
ω
e1 and ω
       e2 :
                           α e1                            β      e2     b1 .
                    ω
                    e1 =     +             ,    ω
                                                e2 = 0.9     + 1.3 + 0.3 E              (4.27)
                           2   2                           2      2
The corresponding ω e is orthogonal the S 2 cycles with intersection matrix SO(6) ×SO(8)    3
                                                                                            ,
but it is not orthogonal to the cycle 2E  b1 which is now blown up, at a volume ρ 2E    b1 =
    √
0.6 νe. This corresponds to the motion of one D7 brane away from the orientifold plane
of block C. Note that again the coupling is moderately weak, g = 1/1.61 = 0.6.
    We also note that, with respect to our SO(8)4-example, we have fixed one more defor-
mation of ω3 and one of ω e3 . The stabilisation of the extra ω
                                                              e3 deformation is the signal of a
mass for the gauge field on the D7 brane that has been moved. This mass is explained in
type IIB by the fact that D7 fluxes gauge some shift symmetries by vectors on the branes.
Since the U(1) on the brane is broken, the resulting gauge group is SO(8)3 ×SO(6) [26–29].

SO(8)3 × SO(6) × U (1)
In the example studied above, we have given a flux that fixes the desired brane configura-
tion. Moreover it fixes one further deformation of ω3 and one of ω e3 , with respect to the
      4
SO(8) example presented before. This is related to the fact that the rank of the 3 × 3
block has been increased to 3; so we get two negative norm eigenvectors with non-zero
eigenvalues. But we can choose a different flux, such that the number of negative norm
eigenvectors relative to non-zero eigenvalues does not change with respect to the SO(8)4
case:
                                                         
                                       1 1
                                     1 1                 
                                                         
                                            1 1 0        
                                IΛ
                              G =                       ,                         (4.28)
                                             1  3  1      
                                                         
                                            0 0 0        
                                                      015

                                                                   b1 .
where the 3 × 3 block is still with respect to the cycles β, e2 , 2E
    Again, Ga G satisfies the tadpole cancellation condition. The eigenvalues relative to the
first block are the same as in Eq. (4.14). The eigenvalues of the second block are

                           λωe2 = 27.3 ,       λũ2 = 4.7 ,     λũ4 = 0 .              (4.29)

                                                  26
They are all non-negative and different from each other. The positive norm eigenvectors
give ω
     e1 and ω
            e2 :
                           α e1                        β      e2     b1 .
                    ω
                    e1 =     +        ,     ω
                                            e2 = 0.8     + 1.4 + 0.3 E                  (4.30)
                           2   2                       2      2
As before, the corresponding ω e is orthogonal the S 2 cycles with intersection matrix SO(6)×
SO(8)  3                                            b
      , but it√is not orthogonal to the cycle 2E1 which is now blown up, at a volume
ρ 2E b1 = 0.6 νe. Again, one D7 brane is moved from the orientifold plane of block C.
    In this case, we do not break any further U(1). In fact, the flux we turned on contributes
to the gauging of an isometry that has been gauged also in the SO(8)4 case. This can be
easily understood in the M-theory context, where the relevant gauge field is one of the C e1µ
                                                                                            Λ
                                                                                              .

SO(8)3 × SO(4) × SU (2)
As a further example, let us choose z1 = z2 = d and all other zI = 0. We now find that
e · C2 = d. For all other cycles in Table (4.6) the intersection with ω
ω                                                                       e still vanishes, so
we have blown up a different cycle than in the previous examples. From the assignment
between cycles and forms it is clear that we have moved two branes away from the O-plane.
As C1 remains shrunk, these branes are on top of each other. From the type IIB perspective,
we thus expect the gauge symmetry SO(4) × SU(2). Examining the intersection matrix
of the shrunk cycles C1 , C3 and C4 we indeed find a diagonal matrix with entries −2.
This happens because we have blown up the cycle C2 and thus deleted the second row and
second column from the Cartan matrix of SO(8):
                                           
                        −2 1         0    0                     
                       1 −2 1                     −2 0       0
                                         1
                      0                      −→  0 −2 0  .                         (4.31)
                               1 −2 0 
                                                     0    0 −2
                         0     1     0 −2

The result is minus the Cartan matrix of SO(4)×SU(2), as expected. As before, we need a
basis of integral cycles in which shrunk and blown-up cycles do not intersect. To construct
it, we replace the cycle C2 with the cycle E b1 + Eb2 = e2 + E1 + E2 . It has self-intersection
−2, so that the intersection matrix in the new basis of cycles which we use for D-brane
motion in the C block is
                                                       
                                     −2 0        0    0
                                    0 −2 0           0
                                                       .                               (4.32)
                                   0      0 −2 0 
                                      0    0     0 −2




                                              27
In this basis, a flux that stabilises the desired gauge group is given by:
                                                           
                                           1 1
                                        1 1                
                                                           
                                                1 1 1 
                                   IΛ
                                 G =                      ,                        (4.33)
                                                 1  3  1    
                                                           
                                                1 1 2 
                                                          0
                                                                b1 + E
where now the 3 × 3 block is with respect to the cycles β, e2 , E    b2 . The eigenvalues
corresponding to this block are:

                        λωe2 = 19.6 ,     λũ2 = 11.2 ,    λũ4 = 1.2 .               (4.34)

They are all positive and different from each other. ω
                                                     e1 and ω
                                                            e2 are given by:
                   α e1                         β       e2               
             ω
             e1 = + ,                   ω                          b
                                        e2 = 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 E1 + E2 .  b             (4.35)
                   2    2                       2        2
The corresponding ω e is orthogonal the S 2 cycles with intersection matrix SO(4) × SU(2) ×
       3
SO(8) , but it is not orthogonal to the cycle E b1 + Eb2 which is now blown up.
    Also in this example, we have fixed one further deformation of ω3 and one of ω  e3 . This
in particular breaks the gauge group on the two D7 branes from U(2) to SU(2).

4.5    Fixing almost all Moduli
In the previous examples we have considered fluxes that stabilise the D7-brane positions
and part of the metric moduli of K3, while leaving some geometric moduli unfixed. This
was due to the large amount of zero eigenvalues of Ga G. In what follows, we will present
an example of an integral flux that satisfies the tadpole cancellation condition and fixes
almost all geometric moduli. The remaining unstabilised moduli are the size of the fiber
   f as prescribed by the F-theory limit, three deformations of Σ, and the two volumes
in K3,
            f
of K3 and K3.
    To write down the flux we will choose two different bases of integral cycles in H 2 (K3)
            f The second one is the same as in the example SO(8)4, while for H 2 (K3)
and in H 2 (K3).
we choose an integral basis with intersection matrix
                                                          
                               0 1
                             1 0                          
                                                          
                                       0   1              
                                                          
                                       1 0                .                         (4.36)
                                                          
                                               0 1        
                                                          
                                               1 0        
                                                         4
                                                       D4

                                              28
In these bases, we choose the flux matrix to be
                                                                         
                                    1 −1
                                −1       1                               
                                                                         
                          IΛ
                        G =                   1 −1                      .                     (4.37)
                                                                          
                                              −1  1                      
                                                                  G4(4)

where                                                
                                            −1 −1 0 0
                                           0   0 1 1 
                                   G(4) = 
                                           0
                                                      .                                         (4.38)
                                                0 1 0 
                                             0 −1 0 0
    This flux satisfies tr Ga G = 8 + 8 + 4 × 8 = 48. Moreover, the G(4) blocks have
eigenvalues equal to 2, while the 2 × 2 blocks have eigenvalues equal to 0 for the positive
norm eigenvectors and 8 for the negative norm eigenvectors. In the next section, we will see
that the resulting minimum is supersymmetric (N = 2 in 4d). The eigenvalues relative to
positive norm eigenvectors are such that all moduli are fixed apart from the deformations
                     ej ’s in the first U-block19 .
of the ωi ’s and the ω


5      SUSY Vacua
Finally, we want to study the question of supersymmetric vacua. This question has been
analysed for M-theory on a generic eight-dimensional manifold in [19, 22]. In the presence
of fluxes a supersymmetric solution is a warped product of R1,2 and some internal manifold
which is conformally Calabi–Yau [22]. The flux G4 must be primitive (J ∧ G4 = 0)
and of Hodge type (2, 2) with respect to the Kähler form and the complex structure of
the underlying Calabi–Yau20 . Given a metric with SU(4) holonomy, there is only one
associated Kähler form J and one holomorphic four-form Ω. Moreover there are only
two invariant Majorana–Weyl spinors, which implies N = 2 supersymmetry in the three-
dimensional theory.
     In our case, K3 × K3 has holonomy SU(2) × SU(2). As we have seen previously, for
each K3 factor, the metric is invariant under the SO(3) that rotates the ωi ’s. This means
that, given the metric of K3 × K3, there is an S 2 × S 2 of possible complex structures and
associated Kähler forms. Moreover, the holonomy SU(2) × SU(2) implies that the number
of globally defined Majorana–Weyl spinors is four, corresponding to N = 4 supersymmetry
in three dimensions. The R-symmetry is the SO(4) ≃ SO(3) × SO(3) that rotates the four
real spinors and the corresponding S 2 × S 2 of complex structures. When this symmetry is
  19
   This is a singular example, as now the lower K3 is singular.
  20
   In the following, all the quantities of the internal manifold are relative to the unwarped Calabi–Yau
metric.

                                                  29
broken to the SO(2) which rotates the real and imaginary part of Ω, then we have N = 2
supersymmetry. On the other hand, if it is completely broken we have N = 0.
    A minimum is supersymmetric if we can associate with the metric a Kähler form J and
a complex structure Ω, such that G4 is primitive and√of Hodge-type
                                                               √    (2,2). This means that
there must be a choice of ωi and ω  ej , let us say J = 2ν ω3 + 2e
                                                                 νωe3 and Ω = ω ∧ ωe (with
ω = ω1 + iω2 and ω e=ω        ω2 ), such that G4 ∧ J = 0 and G4 ∧ Ω = G4 ∧ Ω̄ = 0. In our
                        e1 + ie
formalism, this is equivalent to:

    • Primitivity, G4 ∧ J = 0 :

                            Gω
                             e3 = 0 ,                       Ga ω 3 = 0 .                 (5.1)

      In terms of the eigenvalues of Ga G this means a3 = 0. We see that the primitivity
      condition translates to the existence of a non-trivial kernel of Ga G|Σe and G Ga |Σ .
      The vectors in the kernels make the Kähler form.
             (2,2)
    • G4 = G4        :
                                     0 = (ω · Ge
                                               ω ) = a1 − a2 .                           (5.2)
      This means a1 = a2 ≡ a.

   To summarise, the necessary and sufficient condition for the flux to preserve susy in
                                                    e Σ) takes the form
the minimum is that G (when restricted to the block Σ,
                                                 
                                          a
                                G Σe =  a  .                                     (5.3)
                                                0

For a = 0, the SO(4) R-symmetry is unbroken and the minimum preserves all the N = 4
supersymmetries. For a 6= 0, only an SO(2) subgroup of the R-symmetry is preserved and
we have N = 2 supersymmetries in three dimensions.
    We note that in the case of fluxes which are compatible with the F-theory limit, the
condition a3 = 0 is always satisfied and so one has simply to check that the other two
eigenvalues are equal to each other or possibly zero.


6     Conclusions
In this paper, we have analysed in detail the stabilisation of D7-brane configurations by
fluxes. To do that we have used the F-theory language, i.e. we have studied the stabilisation
problem in M-theory and then mapped the results to type IIB.
    We studied the stabilization of D7/O7 configurations on K3 × T 2 /Z2 . The O7 planes
and the D7 branes are wrapped on K3 and localised on T 2 /Z2 ; in particular, the O-planes
sit at the four singularities of T 2 /Z2 . The D7 moduli are the positions of the D7 branes on

                                             30
T 2 /Z2 . The M-theory dual of this background is given by the compactification on K3×K3
(in the F-theory limit), where the second K3 is elliptically fibred.
     Our aim was to analyse the moduli stabilisation, in this background, by integral three-
form closed string fluxes and by D7 worldvolume two-form fluxes, using F-theory language.
The type IIB geometric and D7 moduli are all mapped to M-theory geometric moduli.
Three-form and two-form fluxes are both mapped to four-form fluxes.
     We have considered M-theory on K3 × K3 and derived the four-form flux generated
potential for the geometric moduli in the Section 2. We have expressed it in terms of the
three orthogonal vectors of H 2 (K3) that determine the metric of K3. Furthermore, we
explictly found the flux-induced mass terms for the vector fields coming from the three-
form field. In the Section 3 we have worked out in detail the moduli stabilisation, finding
the geometric conditions for a flux to minimise the potential: It must map the three-plane
of one K3 to the three-plane of the other K3 and back. Using the duality, we can map the
stabilised point found in M-theory moduli space to a point in type IIB moduli space. In
this way we can see which D7 configuration is stabilised by a particular flux.
     The M-theory fluxes dual to Poincaré-symmetry-preserving type IIB fluxes do not sta-
bilise the size of the fibre. So we always have a flat direction in the M-theory moduli space.
Of this line, only one point corresponds to a four dimensional vacuum, the one associated
with zero fibre size. We have verified that it is at infinite distance from any other point
in the moduli space. The F-theory limit consists in going to this specific point along the
flat direction. We have described this limit in detail in Section 3.2. In particular, we have
seen which moduli disappear from the M-theory moduli space when we take the F-theory
limit.
     In Section 4 we have studied some examples. First, we have reviewed the map between
the D7 moduli and the dual M-theory geometric dual moduli worked out in [21]. This
map enabled us to outline an explicit procedure to find a flux that stabilises a desired
gauge group via its pattern of shrinking cycles. Using this procedure, we have shown a
flux that stabilises 4 D7 branes on top of each O-plane. Then we have found which fluxes
we have to turn on to modify this configuration and move one or two branes away from
one O-plane. This changes the gauge group in type IIB. Correspondingly, the flux fixes a
different singularity in the upper K3, i.e. some cycles are blown up.
     In the examples we have also checked whether there are some stabilised Kähler moduli
of the lower K3. When this is the case, some Kähler moduli of the upper K3 are stabilised
too. These are mapped to the fourth components of four-dimensional vector fields [25].
The corresponding three-dimensional scalars acquire a mass since they are stabilised. The
corresponding three-dimensional vectors also become massive (see Section 2.3). So we
concluded that the resulting four-dimensional vectors acquire a mass. This result matches
with what was found in [26,27], studying directly type IIB on K3×T 2 /Z2 (see also [28,29]).
     At the end of Section 4, we have reported one further example. We have presented a
flux that stabilises almost all the moduli, showing that a general F-theory flux would fix
almost all the moduli (except one Kähler modulus in the lower K3, that corresponds to

                                             31
the fibre size in the upper K3).
    In the last section we have considered the sypersymmetry conditions on the set of the
four-dimensional Minkowski vacua we have studied. In general supersymmetry is com-
pletely broken, but under some conditions, the N = 1 or even N = 2 supersymmetry
in four dimensions can be preserved. We have found these conditions using an eleven-
dimensional approach.

   In this work we have studied a particular example, K3×K3, in which we have complete
control over D7-brane stabilisation by fluxes. This is due to the simplicity of the eight
dimensional manifold. Our final goal is to reproduce the results found in this paper using
more complicated CY fourfolds, in which the D7 configurations include also intersecting
branes. A first step would be to consider some Voisin–Borcea manifold, modding out
K3 × K3 by a freely acting involution. This breaks the SO(3) symmetry of K3 and gives a
unique complex structure to the fourfold. Starting from such examples, we hope to further
develop our intuition for geometric moduli stabilisation in F-theory and eventually move
forward to generic four-folds.




Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Hagen Triendl for discussions and to Rainer Ebert for comments on
the manuscript. This work was supported by SFB-Transregio 33 ”The Dark Universe”
by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). CL acknowledges partial support from the
European Union 6th framework program MRTN-CT-2006-035863 ”UniverseNet”.




                                           32
A       Lattice of Integral Cycles of K3
The scalar product defined in (2.2), or equivalently, the counting of oriented intersection
numbers of 2-cycles gives us a natural symmetric bilinear form on H2 (K3, Z). It can be
shown [37] that with this scalar product, H2 (K3, Z) is an even self-dual lattice of signature
(3, 19). By the classification of even self-dual lattices we know that we may choose a basis
for H2 (K3, Z) such that the inner product is characterised by the matrix

                               U ⊕ U ⊕ U ⊕ (−E8 ) ⊕ (−E8 ) ,                             (A.1)

where
                                                     
                                                0 1
                                      U=                  ,                              (A.2)
                                                1 0

and E8 denotes the Cartan matrix of E8 .
   Any vector in the lattice of integral cycles of an elliptically fibred K3 can now be written
as

                                  D = pi ei + pj ej + qI EI ,                            (A.3)

where i, j run from one to three and I, J from 1 to 16.
                                                      P The pi as wellPas the pi are all
integers. The E8⊕2 lattice is spanned by qI fulfilling I=1..8 qI = 2Z,  I=9..16 qI = 2Z.
In each of the two E8 blocks, the coefficients furthermore have to be all integer or all
half-integer. The only nonvanishing inner products among the vectors in this expansion
are

                     EI · EJ = −δIJ ,                           ei · ej = δji .          (A.4)




B       The Potential in Terms of W and W̌
For completeness, we also give the flux induced scalar potential in terms of two superpo-
tentials. For a CY4 , it reads [24]
                                                                      
                        eK αβ̄             1 1 mn                    2
                  V = 3 G Dα W Dβ̄ W + 4         Ǧ ∂m W̌ ∂n W̌ − W̌     .          (B.1)
                        V                  V   2
                R
Here K = − ln CY4 Ω ∧ Ω and W and W̌ are given by
                         Z                                Z
                                                        1
                  W =       Ω ∧ G4 ,              W̌ =       J ∧ J ∧ G4 .           (B.2)
                                                        4
                      CY4                                       CY4



                                                33
The complex structure moduli are labelled by α = 1, . . . , h3,1 , while m = 1, . . . , h1,1 counts
the Kähler moduli.
   For K3 ×K3, we get a similar but not identical form. Note fist that the above potential
depends on h1,1 + 2h3,1 real moduli. This is the dimension of the metric moduli space of a
                                      f whose moduli space has dimension
CY4. But it is not the case for K3 × K3,
                                                               
                             2 × 58 = 2 3(h1,1 (K3) − 1) + 1 .                                (B.3)

The moduli are the volume and the deformations of the ωi ’s that are orthogonal to all the
ωi ’s and whose number is then h2 (K3) − 3 = h1,1 − 1. On the other hand ,
                                    
                 f + 2h3,1 K3 × K3
       h1,1 K3 × K3                  f
                                                                                  (B.4)
                               = 2 h1,1 (K3) + 2h2,0 (K3) h1,1 (K3) = 2 × 60 .

This is again a reflection of the fact that for K3, only the three-plane itself is geometri-
cally meaningful: The two “missing” moduli correspond to the rotation of j into real and
imaginary parts of ω.
    By an explicit computation one can get the new form of the potential:

                  V = VG3,1 + VG2,2
                                                                                 
                     eK αβ̄               1           1 mn                                   (B.5)
                    = 3 G(0) Dα W Dβ̄ W + 4             Ǧ ∂m W̌ ∂n W̌ 2 − W̌ 2       .
                     V                   V            2

                                                                                         f
The second term, VG2,2 is the same as for the CY4 (note that m = 1, ..., h1,1 (K3)+h1,1 (K3)).
The only difference is in VG3,1 : In the CY4 case it is given by the integral of G3,1 ∧ G1,3 ,
where the subscript denotes the Hodge decomposition. In that case it is also equal to the
                 (0)     (0)                                                     f it is not
primitive part G3,1 ∧ G1,3 , since G3,1 is automatically primitive. On K3 × K3,
primitive and one must remove from G3,1 the piece proportional to J. This is what the
metric G(0) does. It is given by
                                     R                            
                                           χα ∧χ̄β̄
                                      − K3
                                         R
                                          K3 ω∧ω̄
                             G(0) =                 R
                                                              ¯  ,
                                                       g χ̃ρ ∧χ̃σ̄
                                                                                         (B.6)
                                                    − K3
                                                       R
                                                           e ∧ω
                                                           ω  ē
                                                           g
                                                           K3


where {χα } is a basis for (1,1)-forms orthogonal to ω3 .
   The supersymmetry condition for the vacua can be written in terms of these two su-
perpotentials. In this case they assume the standard form (see for example [18, 23, 24])

                Dα W = 0 ,                   W = 0,                     ∂m W̌ = 0 .          (B.7)

The first two conditions say that the G4 is a (2,2)-form, while the last one implies G4 is
primitive.

                                                34
C         Linear Algebra on Spaces with Indefinite Metric
Since some of the usual theorems about eigenvalues and eigenvectors of self-adjoint oper-
ators do not carry over to the case of an indefinite scalar product, we collect some useful
facts in this appendix (see also [41]). We consider a real vector space Ve equipped with
a non-degenerate scalar product (ṽ · w̃) of signature (n,m), where n < m and n refers to
positive norm. In the case we are interested in, Ve = H 2 K3  f and the signature is (3, 19).
Let A be an endomorphism of Ve which is selfadjoint with respect to this scalar product.
We denote the set of eigenvalues of A by {λi }. Since the eigenvalues are the roots of the
real characteristic polynomial, they are either real or come in complex conjugate pairs.
We consider the complexification VeC of Ve , such that the scalar product involves complex
conjugation of the first entry.
    In VeC , A has n + m eigenvalues. Note that a self-adjoint operator A is not necessarily
diagonalisable in a space with indefinite metric. However, this problem only occurs if
there exists a zero-norm eigenvector relative to a degenerate eigenvalue [42]. We will not
consider this non-generic case. Then A is diagonalizable in VeC with eigenvectors given by
{ei }. From the selfadjointness, we have
                                            
                                    λ̄i − λj (ei · ej ) = 0 .                          (C.1)
Since the metric is indefinite, (ei · ei ) = 0 does not imply ei = 0, so that not all eigenvalues
need to be real.
   If there exist one non-real eigenvalue λ with eigenvector e, then λ̄ is also an eigen-
value.The corresponding eigenvector is ē. Equation (C.1) tells us that e and ē are null. In
the case we are considering, λ is non-degenerate. Then, the non-degeneracy of the inner
product implies (ē, e) 6= 0. With these vector we can construct two real vectors
                            ṽ + = e + ē ,                         ṽ − = −i (e − ē)     (C.2)
that have opposite norm. Then, ṽ ± generate a subspace of the original real space Ve ,
such that the scalar product on this subspace is of signature (1, 1). One can define the
orthogonal complement of this subspace in Ve and look for the next complex eigenvalue
and the corresponding 2 × 2 block. There can be at most n of these 2 × 2 blocks. Then
there are at least m − n real eigenvalues.
    We conclude that the canonical form of a generic matrix A selfadjoint with respect to a
indefinite inner product with signature (n, m) is block diagonal, with n 2 × 2 block relative
to subspaces of signature (1, 1) and a positive definite (m − n)-diagonal block21 . Vectors
belonging to different blocks are orthogonal to each other.
    Let us concentrate on a 2 × 2 block. We choose a basis such that the metric has the
matrix form                                       
                                       f      0 1
                                      M=             .                                 (C.3)
                                              1 0
  21
       A matrix selfadjoint with respect to a definite metric is positive definite

                                                        35
                                        f= M
The selfadjointness condition on A is A M    f AT , implying that
                                               
                                            a b
                                      A=          .                                                (C.4)
                                            c a

                                  f invariant, A can be brought to the canonical form22
With a transformation that leaves M
                                                        
                             ′    a b          ′      a −b
                           A =           or A =               .                   (C.5)
                                   b a                b a
                                                        
                                             1     1   1
If we now change basis with the matrix P = √2             , then M and A go to:
                                                   1 −1
                                                                  
                f=     1   0           ′    λ 1   0         ′     a  b
               M               ,     A =               or A =            .        (C.6)
                       0 −1                 0 λ2                  −b a

     Let us now specialise to the case of A = Ga G, i.e. V is another vector space, equipped
with a scalar product of the same signature, and G is a map from Ve to V . Ga denotes
its adjoint with respect to these scalar products, i.e. (v, Gṽ) = (Ga v, ṽ) (where ṽ ∈ Ve and
v ∈ V ). Clearly, the composition Ga G is a selfadjoint map from Ve to itself.
     We want to determine the canonical form for G. It will be of the same structure of
A, with n 2 × 2 blocks of signature (1, 1) and a diagonal part relative to a metric in the
form −1m−n . The diagonal part will be simply given by the square root of the diagonal
block of A. Regarding the 2 × 2 blocks, we find that both canonical forms can be written
as A′ = g a g with a “square root” matrix g. Since A is of the form Ga G, the eigenvalues
λ1 , λ2 in (C.6) must be either both positive or both negative. We consider these two cases
separately. The canonical forms for g are
                  √                               p                         
                     λ1 √0                     0        |λ 2 |            γ    δ
              g=                 ,     g= p                      , g=              ,        (C.7)
                     0      λ2                 |λ1 |    0               −δ γ

where in the last matrix we have defined γ and δ such that α = γ 2 − δ 2 and β = 2γδ.
   Then, the matrix of G can be brought with a change of basis into the form:
                                                            
                               g1
                                  ..                        
                                     .                      
                                       gn √                 
                                                            
                       Gd =                                 .                     (C.8)
                                            λ 1             
                                                 ..         
                                                    .       
                                                       p
                                                        λn−m
  22
    If b, c are either both zero or both non-zero. Otherwise, the matrix is of the form we said before: It
has a degenerate real eigenvalue relative to a zero norm eigenvector.

                                                   36
    If we call the matrix of the change of basis Pe, then we can summarise our results as:
                           Pe−1 Ga GPe = Gad Gd        ,   PeT M
                                                               fPe = M                 (C.9)
where M is the diagonal matrix given by n 2 × 2 blocks (+1, −1) and an m − n block
(−1, ..., −1).

   We now show that there exists a change of basis in the space V such that the matrix
of G can be brought to the form Gd , i.e. there exists a matrix P such that
                                         P −1 GPe = Gd .                              (C.10)

This matrix is given by P ≡ Ga −1 PeGad . Let us check that:

                       P −1 GPe = Gad −1 Pe−1 Ga GPe = Gad −1 Gad Gd = Gd             (C.11)
Moreover, we obtain the relations:
         Pe−1 Ga P = Gad            P −1GGa P = Gd Gad           P T MP = M .         (C.12)
    Only in the case of all eigenvalues being positive do we get a fully diagonal form for G,
otherwise we have non-diagonal 2 × 2 blocks.
    Returning to the potential (and to the K3 case where n = 3 and m = 19), we see that
if Ga G is diagonalizable with non-negative eigenvalues, then G and Ga can be brought
to the same diagonal form Gd with respect to bases made up of three positive norm and
nineteen negative norm vectors. This means that the minimum condition (3.1) is satisfied.
The converse is also true: If the condition (3.1) is satisfied, then G and Ga can be brought
to a diagonal form by changes of bases and so Ga G becomes diagonal with non-negative
entries.


D      F-Theory Point in the Kähler Moduli Space
Let us fix two directions of                   e
                            √ the three-plane Σ to form the holomorphic two-form,     let us
say ω
    e=ω  e1 + ie       e
               ω2 , so j = 2ν ω  e3 . We are left with 20 moduli: the 19 δe   m
                                                                             ω2 deformations
of ω
   e3 and the volume νe. These remaining 20 moduli can be parametrised with the 20
deformations of e           f
                j in H 1,1 (K3):
                                                               D              E
             e     e     e     a
             j = bB + f F + c ũa ,                              e  e
                                             with ũa a basis ⊥ F , B, ω
                                                                       e1 , ω
                                                                            e2 .       (D.1)

So we are essentially left with the Kähler moduli space.
   The metric on this moduli space is (i, j run over {b, f, ca })
                                 Z       
                gij = −∂i ∂j log    e
                                    j ∧e j = −∂i ∂j log (2 b(f − b) − ca ca ) .        (D.2)

                                                  37
   We want to use this metric to compute the distance between one general point of the
moduli space and a point corresponding to the F-theory limit. As discussed in Section 3.2,
b and f give the volumes of fibre and base, and the F-theory limit involves b → 0 while
respecting the bound (3.9). We will consider a curve parameterised by ǫ,

                b = b0 ǫ2 ,                      f = const. ,                   ca = ca0 ǫ ,   (D.3)

where ca0 ca0 = 2αb (f − b) and α ∈ [0, 1) parameterises the degree to which the bound is
saturated. Note that the parameterisation (D.1) is simple, but not exceedingly convenient.
In particular, one might worry that the volume of K3  f vanishes in the limit of α → 1, even
though base and fibre volume stay finite. However, before that limit is reached, one can
reparameterise the basis cycles such that the new ca are again zero, while f is now smaller
than before. The limit α → 1 is then the same as ǫ → 0.                               R0
    The metric distance of the F-theory point from any other point (ǫ0 ) is given by ǫ0 ds,
where                                     q
                                    ds = gij Ẋ i Ẋ j dǫ .                            (D.4)

X i are b, f, ca and Ẋ i are the derivatives of X i with respect to ǫ. By explicit calculation,
one can show that all terms in the sum under the square root are of order ǫ−2 in the limit
ǫ → 0, times some finite coefficient. Hence, the metric distance from any finite point ǫ0 to
ǫ = 0 is
                              Z0          Z0
                                               dǫ
                                   ds =           · (term finite for ǫ → 0) ,                  (D.5)
                                               ǫ
                              ǫ0          ǫ0

i.e. it diverges logarithmically.


References
 [1] M. Grana, “Flux compactifications in string theory: A comprehensive review,” Phys.
     Rept. 423, 91 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0509003]

 [2] M. R. Douglas and S. Kachru, “Flux compactification,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 79 (2007)
     733 [arXiv:hep-th/0610102]

 [3] R. Blumenhagen, B. Kors, D. Lust and S. Stieberger, “Four-dimensional String Com-
     pactifications with D-Branes, Orientifolds and Fluxes,” Phys. Rept. 445 (2007) 1
     [arXiv:hep-th/0610327]

 [4] F. Denef, “Les Houches Lectures on Constructing String Vacua,” [arXiv:0803.1194
     [hep-th]]


                                                      38
 [5] L. McAllister and E. Silverstein, “String Cosmology: A Review,” Gen. Rel. Grav. 40,
     565 (2008) [arXiv:0710.2951 [hep-th]]

 [6] C. Beasley, J. J. Heckman and C. Vafa, “GUTs and Exceptional Branes in
     F-theory - I,” [arXiv:0802.3391 [hep-th]], “GUTs and Exceptional Branes in F-
     theory - II: Experimental Predictions,” [arXiv:0806.0102 [hep-th]]

 [7] R. Donagi and M. Wijnholt, “Model Building with F-Theory,” [arXiv:0802.2969
     [hep-th]]

 [8] J. F. G. Cascales, M. P. Garcia del Moral, F. Quevedo and A. M. Uranga, “Realistic
     D-brane models on warped throats: Fluxes, hierarchies and moduli stabilization,”
     JHEP 0402 (2004) 031 [arXiv:hep-th/0312051]

 [9] H. Verlinde and M. Wijnholt, “Building the standard model on a D3-brane,” JHEP
     0701 (2007) 106 [arXiv:hep-th/0508089]

[10] F. Marchesano and G. Shiu, “Building MSSM flux vacua,” JHEP 0411, 041 (2004)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0409132]

[11] T. Watari and T. Yanagida, “Product-group unification in type IIB string theory,”
     Phys. Rev. D 70, 036009 (2004) [arXiv:hep-ph/0402160]

[12] C. Vafa, “Evidence for        F-Theory,”    Nucl.   Phys.    B   469,     403   (1996)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9602022]

[13] A. Sen, “Orientifold limit of F-theory vacua,” Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 68 (1998) 92
     [Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 67 (1998) 81] [arXiv:hep-th/9709159]

[14] R. Donagi and M. Wijnholt,            “Breaking     GUT     Groups   in    F-Theory,”
     [arXiv:0808.2223 [hep-th]]

[15] J. J. Heckman and C. Vafa,          “F-theory,    GUTs,     and the Weak Scale,”
     [arXiv:0809.1098 [hep-th]]

[16] J. Marsano, N. Saulina and S. Schafer-Nameki, “Gauge Mediation in F-Theory GUT
     Models,” [arXiv:0808.1571 [hep-th]]

[17] L. Gorlich, S. Kachru, P. K. Tripathy and S. P. Trivedi, “Gaugino condensation and
     nonperturbative superpotentials in flux compactifications,” JHEP 0412 (2004) 074
     [arXiv:hep-th/0407130]

[18] D. Lust, P. Mayr, S. Reffert and S. Stieberger, “F-theory flux, destabilization
     of orientifolds and soft terms on D7-branes,” Nucl. Phys. B 732, 243 (2006)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0501139]

                                           39
[19] K. Dasgupta, G. Rajesh and S. Sethi, “M theory, orientifolds and G-flux,” JHEP 9908
     (1999) 023 [arXiv:hep-th/9908088]

[20] P. S. Aspinwall and R. Kallosh, “Fixing all moduli for M-theory on K3 x K3,” JHEP
     0510, 001 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0506014]

[21] A. P. Braun, A. Hebecker and H. Triendl, “D7-Brane Motion from M-Theory Cy-
     cles and Obstructions in the Weak Coupling Limit,” Nucl. Phys. B 800 (2008) 298
     [arXiv:0801.2163 [hep-th]]

[22] K. Becker and M. Becker, “M-Theory on Eight-Manifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B 477
     (1996) 155 [arXiv:hep-th/9605053]

[23] S. Gukov, C. Vafa and E. Witten, “CFT’s from Calabi-Yau four-folds,” Nucl. Phys.
     B 584, 69 (2000) [Erratum-ibid. B 608, 477 (2001)] [arXiv:hep-th/9906070]

[24] M. Haack and J. Louis, “M-theory compactified on Calabi-Yau fourfolds with back-
     ground flux,” Phys. Lett. B 507 (2001) 296 [arXiv:hep-th/0103068]

[25] R. Valandro, “Type IIB Flux Vacua from M-theory via F-theory,” [arXiv:0811.2873
     [hep-th]]

[26] L. Andrianopoli, R. D’Auria, S. Ferrara and M. A. Lledo, “4-D gauged super-
     gravity analysis of type IIB vacua on K3 x T**2/Z(2),” JHEP 0303 (2003) 044
     [arXiv:hep-th/0302174]

[27] C. Angelantonj, R. D’Auria, S. Ferrara and M. Trigiante, “K3 x T**2/Z(2) orientifolds
     with fluxes, open string moduli and critical points,” Phys. Lett. B 583 (2004) 331
     [arXiv:hep-th/0312019]

[28] M. Haack, D. Krefl, D. Lust, A. Van Proeyen and M. Zagermann, “Gaug-
     ino condensates and D-terms from D7-branes,” JHEP 0701 (2007) 078
     [arXiv:hep-th/0609211]

[29] H. Jockers and J. Louis, “The effective action of D7-branes in N = 1 Calabi-Yau
     orientifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B 705, 167 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0409098]

[30] E. Cremmer, B. Julia and J. Scherk, “Supergravity theory in 11 dimensions,” Phys.
     Lett. B 76 (1978) 409

[31] M. J. Duff, J. T. Liu and R. Minasian, “Eleven-dimensional origin of string / string
     duality: A one-loop test,” Nucl. Phys. B 452 (1995) 261 [arXiv:hep-th/9506126]

[32] A. A. Tseytlin, “R**4 terms in 11 dimensions and conformal anomaly of (2,0) theory,”
     Nucl. Phys. B 584 (2000) 233 [arXiv:hep-th/0005072]

                                           40
[33] E. Witten, “On flux quantization in M-theory and the effective action,” J. Geom.
     Phys. 22 (1997) 1 [arXiv:hep-th/9609122]

[34] S. B. Giddings, S. Kachru and J. Polchinski, “Hierarchies from fluxes in string com-
     pactifications,” Phys. Rev. D 66 (2002) 106006 [arXiv:hep-th/0105097]

[35] E. Witten, “String theory dynamics in various dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B 443, 85
     (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9503124]

[36] A. Sen, “F-theory and         Orientifolds,”   Nucl.   Phys.        B    475    (1996)   562
     [arXiv:hep-th/9605150]

[37] P. S. Aspinwall, “K3 surfaces and string duality,” [arXiv:hep-th/9611137]

[38] M. R. Gaberdiel and B. Zwiebach, “Exceptional groups from open strings,” Nucl.
     Phys. B 518 (1998) 151 [arXiv:hep-th/9709013]

[39] W. Lerche, “On the          heterotic/F-theory    duality      in       eight   dimensions,”
     arXiv:hep-th/9910207

[40] B. S. Acharya, “On realising N = 1 super Yang-Mills in M theory,”
     [arXiv:hep-th/0011089], B. S. Acharya and S. Gukov, “M theory and Sin-
     gularities of Exceptional Holonomy Manifolds,” Phys. Rept. 392, 121 (2004)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0409191]

[41] T. Ya. Azizov and I. S. Iokhvidov, “Linear Operators in Spaces with an Indefinite
     Metric,” (Wiley, New York, 1989)
     U. Gunther and F. Stefani, “Third order spectral branch points in Krein space related
     setups: P T -symmetric matrix toy model, MHD α2 -dynamo, and extended Squire
     equation,” Czech. J. Phys. 55 (2005) 1099 [arXiv:math-ph/0506021]

[42] L. K. Pandit, “Linear Vector Spaces with Indefinite Metric,” Nuovo Cimento, 10
     (1959), 157




                                            41
