arXiv:math/9812162v1 [math.AG] 31 Dec 1998

Centre de Recherches Mathématiques
CRM Proceedings and Lecture Notes

Picard-Fuchs Uniformization: Modularity of the Mirror Map
and Mirror-Moonshine
Charles F. Doran
Abstract. Motivated by a conjecture of Lian and Yau concerning the mirror
map in string theory [LY1, ICMP], we determine when the mirror map qseries of certain elliptic curve and K3 surface families are Hauptmoduln (genus
zero modular functions). Our geometric criterion for modularity characterizes
orbifold uniformization properties of their Picard-Fuchs equations, effectively
demystifying the mirror-moonshine phenomenon. A longer, more comprehensive treatment of these results can be found in [Dor2]. For a detailed look
at several explicit examples of this phenomenon, see the article by Verrill and
Yui in this volume [VY].

Contents
1. Introduction
2. Calabi-Yau manifolds and the mirror map
3. Orbifold uniformization
4. Elliptic curve case: elliptic modular surfaces
5. Mn -polarized K3 surface case: Mirror-Moonshine
6. Generalizations
References

1
4
7
10
14
22
22

1. Introduction
Although the mirror map was introduced into string theoretic physics only in
the last decade, whence it has lead to mathematical predictions of curve counts on
certain Calabi-Yau threefolds, it is in fact reminiscent of standard mathematical
constructions of the 19th century dating back at least to Legendre’s work on elliptic
functions. In a similarly classical vein such maps have long been of mathematical
interest through their connection with modular functions, e.g., the Hauptmoduln of
Fricke-Klein. Stimulated by the Mirror-Moonshine Conjecture of Lian-Yau ([LY1,
1991 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 14D05, 11F03, 14J32; Secondary 30F35,
14J28, 83E30.
c 0000 (copyright holder)

1

2

CHARLES F. DORAN

ICMP], Conjecture 5.14 below), in this paper we characterize families of elliptic
curves and K3 surfaces for which the mirror map is modular, i.e., is a Hauptmodul.
The Lian-Yau conjecture was originally stated just for a small class of K3
surface pencils constructed by an “orbifold construction”, but it was rapidly realized that their mirror-moonshine observations apply to a larger class of “torically
defined” K3 surface families [LY2]. In fact, as we show here, the modularity phenomenon they observed can occur quite generally in families of elliptic curves with
section and families of lattice polarized K3 surfaces. In particular, the phenomenon
is not “toric” in origin, and can be characterized by other means. The strategy
we follow to do so makes use of the existence of a one-dimensional (coarse) moduli
space and a global Torelli theorem for each type of family. In the elliptic curve case
the moduli space is just the J-line and the Torelli theorem is classical. For families of K3 surfaces with a lattice polarization such moduli and Torelli results were
recently formalized by Dolgachev for his own investigations of mirror-symmetric
families of K3 surfaces motivated by Arnold’s “strange duality” [Dol].
We begin in §2 by introducing Calabi-Yau manifolds, Picard-Fuchs equations,
and the mirror map. The periods of the holomorphic top forms for a family of
Calabi-Yau manifolds define multivalued solutions to the associated Picard-Fuchs
differential equation, a homogeneous Fuchsian ordinary differential equation on the
base of the family. The mirror map is then a “local inverse” to the projectivized
period mapping at a regular singular point with maximal unipotent monodromy.
In fact, since the mirror map depends only on the projective periods, it is insensitive
to simultaneous rescalings of these periods. Thus it is really the projective normal
form of the Picard-Fuchs differential equation which determines the mirror map.
Second order homogeneous Fuchsian ordinary differential equations in projective normal form have a particular connection with automorphic functions, dating
back at least to Poincaré and Fricke-Klein. An automorphic function f for a genus
zero Fuchsian group of the first kind Γ can always be realized as the single-valued
inverse of the ratio of two multi-valued functions u1 (x) and u2 (x) on the curve
Γ \ H∗ ≃ P1 . The functions ui satisfy a second order Fuchsian ordinary differential equation in projective normal form which is naturally associated to f ([Leh]
and §3.2 below). This equation is sometimes called the “Schwarzian equation” or
(orbifold) uniformizing differential equation attached to the automorphic function.
We conclude that, at least for families of Calabi-Yau manifolds with order two
Picard-Fuchs equations:
The mirror map is an automorphic function if and only if the projective normal form of the Picard-Fuchs differential equation is an
orbifold uniformizing differential equation.
In fact, families of elliptic curves with section do have second order PicardFuchs equations (§4.2). For the families of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces, Picard-Fuchs
equations are of order three, but they take a particular form as the symmetric square
of an associated second order equation, a process which preserves the period ratio
and hence the mirror map (§5.2). Thus, to solve the mirror-moonshine modularity
problem we need only characterize, in terms of a “geometric” invariant of the family
of elliptic curves with section (respectively Mn -polarized K3 surfaces), when the
projective normal form of the Picard-Fuchs equation (respectively its square root)
is a uniformizing differential equation attached to an automorphic function. We
call this Picard-Fuchs uniformization.

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

3

In the case of elliptic curves, the natural geometric invariant to consider is Kodaira’s functional invariant J (z), defined as the composition of the multi-valued
period morphism τ (z) = ω1 (z)/ω0 (z) to the upper half plane and the elliptic modular function J(τ ) to the J-line. In other words, the functional invariant associates
to each point of the base of the family the J-invariant of its elliptic curve fiber. Kodaira proves that J (z) is a rational function. We consider the “pullback by J ” of
the uniformizing differential equation Λ for P SL(2, Z). By the rationality of J (z),
the resulting differential equation J ∗ (Λ) agrees with the Picard-Fuchs equation up
to projective equivalence (Proposition 4.7). Thus we need only determine the conditions on the rational function J (z) for the projective normal form of J ∗ (Λ) to be
a uniformizing differential equation. We accomplish this by applying our general
criterion, Theorem 3.22, which characterizes rational functions that pullback one
projective equivalence class of uniformizing differential equations to another.
Next, in §5, we extend our criterion to the case of Mn -polarized families of K3
surfaces. Dolgachev has shown that the (coarse) moduli space for Mn -polarized K3
surfaces is uniformized by the group Γ0 (n)∗ obtained by adding the Fricke involution to the congruence subgroup Γ0 (n) [Dol]. By analogy with the elliptic curve
case, we introduce the generalized functional invariant Hn (z) as the composition of
the multi-valued truncated period morphism τ (z) = Ω1 (z)/Ω0 (z) to the upper half
plane and the normalized Hauptmodul Hn (τ ) for Γ0 (n)∗ , and establish its rationality (§5.4). The criterion from §3.3 then allows us to determine the conditions on
Hn (z) to pullback the uniformizing differential equation for Γ0 (n)∗ to another uniformizing differential equation up to projective equivalence. As a consequence we
obtain the desired characterization of the Lian-Yau mirror-moonshine phenomenon
in Theorem 5.19.
Finally, in §6, a number of natural generalizations of this work are discussed.
Our Picard-Fuchs uniformization results for Mn -polarized K3 surface families extend mutatis mutandis to the general rank 19 lattice polarized case. We note that
the genus-zero restriction on both the uniformizing groups and the base of the families of elliptic curves and K3 surfaces involved can be removed. Moreover, there is an
extension of our modularity criteria to certain multi-parameter families of abelian
varieties and K3 surfaces of various Picard ranks. In fact, there are one-parameter
families of Picard rank 18 K3 surfaces whose mirror maps are “bi-modular”. These
generalizations are treated in [Dor2].
Throughout this paper we assume some basic familiarity with the theory of
Fuchsian ordinary differential equations: regular singular points and their classification into types (i.e., generic, logarithmic, apparent), characteristic exponents,
Frobenius’ theorem, etc. A favorite reference is Yoshida’s book [Yos] which also
includes the theory of (orbifold) uniformization. Other nice presentations of the
classical Fuchsian theory, with quite different applications, can be found in the
survey paper by Varadarajan [Var] and the book by Anosov and Bolibruch [AB].

Remark 1.1. This article is intended to complement the explicit constructions
described by Helena Verrill and Noriko Yui in this proceedings [VY]. By providing
a simple, geometric criterion for the Lian-Yau mirror-moonshine phenomenon which
applies equally well to both elliptic curve and K3 surface families, we hope at once
to “demystify” such examples of this phenomenon, and to highlight the importance
of explicit constructions in answering questions which remain. Taking advantage of

4

CHARLES F. DORAN

the opportunity such a pairing affords, we refer the reader to their paper for several
explicit examples and extra discussion of related subject matter.
2. Calabi-Yau manifolds and the mirror map
In this section we quickly review the basics of Calabi-Yau manifolds, PicardFuchs equations, and the mirror map. The definitions and concepts are stated
without proof, and a single motivational example is provided: that of the universal
family of elliptic curves over the J-line. Perhaps the chief novelty here is the
emphasis on the role played by the “projective normal form” Fuchsian ordinary
differential equation. Although our discussion applies quite generally to families of
Calabi-Yau varieties, we will only be applying it in this paper to the elliptic curve
and K3 surface cases.
At the time of writing, there are only a few general surveys on Calabi-Yau
manifolds and the mirror map written for mathematicians, e.g., [EMM, MSI],
[BP], [Voi]. By the time this volume goes to print it is hoped that the compendium
[CK] will have appeared to fill this gap in the literature.
2.1. Calabi-Yau manifolds.
Definition 2.1. A Calabi-Yau manifold M is a compact complex manifold
with trivial canonical bundle.
Example 2.2. A one dimensional Calabi-Yau manifold is an elliptic curve. A
simply connected Calabi-Yau manifold of dimension two is a K3 surface.
Up to complex scaling, a Calabi-Yau n-fold has a unique holomorphic n-form
ωn,0 ∈ H n (M, C) .
Definition 2.3. The periods of this holomorphic n-form are the numbers
Z
ωn,0
pγ (M ) :=
γ

as γ runs through the n-cycles of M . Fix an ordered basis of n-cycles {γ1 , . . . , γk },
for k the nth Betti number of M . Then the periods of M define the vector
[pγi (M )]ki=1 ∈ Pk−1
the (projective) period point of M .
Example 2.4. Consider the elliptic curve y 2 = 4x3 − g2 x − g3 in Weierstrass
form. Here n = 1 and k = 2. The holomorphic one form is the usual differential of
the first kind dx/y.
2.2. Period mapping and Picard-Fuchs equations.
Definition 2.5. Given a family π : X → S of Calabi-Yau manifolds Xs , by
continuous extension of the basis of n-cycles the periods of the Calabi-Yau fibers
define a vector of k multi-valued functions on the base manifold S
[pγi (s) (Xs )]ki=1 : S → Pk−1
the period mapping associated with the family.

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

5

Example 2.6. Consider the family E of elliptic curves over P1 defined by the
equation
27s
27s
E : y 2 = 4x3 −
x−
.
s−1
s−1
The periods of the form dx/y may be given in terms of the hypergeometric function
2 F1 (see [Sti], pp. 232–233, for explicit expressions).
Suppose now that S = P1 .
The functions pγ(s) (Xs ) satisfy an ordinary differential equation with regular
singular points (i.e., a Fuchsian ODE) [BP]
(2.1)

dk−1 f
dk f
+
P
(s)
+ . . . + Pk (s)f
1
dsk
dsk−1

=

0 , Pi (s) ∈ C(s) .

Definition 2.7. The differential equation (2.1) is called the Picard-Fuchs differential equation of the family π : X → P1 .
Example 2.8. For the family E in Example 2.6, the Picard-Fuchs equation is
d2 f
1 df
(31/144)s − 1/36
+
f =0.
+
ds2
s ds
s2 (s − 1)2

There is a basis of solutions with local monodromies G0 , G1 , G∞ about the regular
singular points {0, 1, ∞} respectively, where






1 1
0 −1
1 1
G0 =
, G1 =
, G∞ =
.
−1 0
1 0
0 1
2.3. Points of maximal unipotent monodromy and the mirror map.
Definition 2.9. A regular singular point of a Fuchsian ordinary differential
equation is called a point of maximal unipotent monodromy if the local monodromy
matrix G is such that G − Ik is nilpotent with exact order k.
In a neighborhood of a point of maximal unipotent monodromy, Frobenius’
method tells us that there is a basis of solutions such that the first is holomorphic
at the point, the second has logarithmic behavior, the next behaves like log2 , . . . ,
up to logk−1 .
Example 2.10. The point of maximal unipotent monodromy in Example 2.8
is ∞ ∈ P1 .
Remark 2.11. Not every family of Calabi-Yau manifolds will have a PicardFuchs differential equation with a point of maximal unipotent monodromy. For
a class of torically constructed hypersurfaces in toric Fano varieties, the existence
of points of maximal unipotent monodromy was established by Hosono, Lian, and
Yau [HLY].
Consider a family of Calabi-Yau manifolds π : X → P1 , whose Picard-Fuchs
equation has a point of maximal unipotent monodromy. In a neighborhood of such
a point consider the truncated period vector consisting only of the holomorphic
solution and the logarithmic solution
[phol (s), plog (s)] : P1 → P1 .

6

CHARLES F. DORAN

If the image lies in the upper half plane H ⊂ P1 , then, possibly after composition
with projective linear transformations so that the singular point lies at 0 ∈ P1 and
maps to ı∞ ∈ H∗ ⊂ P1 , we can consider the q-series for the local inverse mapping
z(q(τ )) : H → P1 , q(τ ) = e2πıτ .

Definition 2.12. This q-series z(q) is called the mirror map of the family
π : X → P1 about the point of maximal unipotent monodromy.
Example 2.13. For the family E of Example 2.6 the mirror map is quite familiar. Since the maximal unipotent monodromy point is at ∞, we change variables
first to z = 1/s. The single-valued local inverse to the period mapping is then the
reciprocal of the q-series for the elliptic modular function J(q)
1
J(q) = + 744 + 196884q + 21493760q 2 + O(q 3 ) ,
q
1
z(q) =
= q − 744q 2 + 356652q 3 − 140361152q 4 + O(q 5 ) .
J(q)
Remark 2.14. The period mapping is defined as a map to projective space. If
one is interested in the mirror map it is often preferable to consider the Picard-Fuchs
differential equation only up to “projective equivalence”.
Definition 2.15. The projective normal form of a Fuchsian ordinary differential equation (e.g., that in equation (2.1) above) is the unique Fuchsian ordinary
differential equation without a (k − 1)st order derivative

dk−2 g
dk g
+
R
(s)
+ . . . + Rk (s)g = 0 , Ri (s) ∈ C(s)
2
dsk
dsk−2
whose fundamental solutions define the same projective period map as that of
equation (2.1).
It is always possible to pass to the projective normal form differential equation
by rescaling each fundamental solution by the kth root of the Wronskian of the
original equation.
Example 2.16. Suppose now that k = 2, i.e., the initial differential equation
is

df
d2 f
+ P1 (s) + P2 (s)f = 0 ,
2
ds
ds
then the projective normal form of this differential equation takes the particularly
simple form


d2 g
1 ′
1
2
+ P2 (s) − P1 (s) − P1 (s) g = 0 .
ds2
2
4

As the process of taking the projective normal form does not alter the position
or type of a maximal unipotent monodromy point, and as the projective solution
determines the mirror map, we find
Lemma 2.17. The mirror map of a family of Calabi-Yau manifolds about a
point of maximal unipotent monodromy of the Picard-Fuchs equation is determined
by the projective normal form of this differential equation.

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

7

3. Orbifold uniformization
In this section we will recall the classical theory of orbifold uniformization of
Riemann surfaces by Fuchsian second order ordinary differential equations, including some basic facts about the Schwarzian derivative, orbifold uniformizing differential equations, and automorphic functions. More details of much of the material
presented here can be found in the nice book by Yoshida [Yos].
3.1. Uniformization of orbifolds.
Definition 3.1. Let X be a complex manifold, Y ⊂ X a hypersurface, Y =
∪j Yj its decomposition into irreducible components. Let the numbers bj , either
∞ or an integer ≥ 2, be the weights attached to the corresponding Yj . The triple
(X, Y, ~b) is called an orbifold if for every point in X \ ∪j {Yj | bj = ∞} there is an
open neighborhood U and a covering manifold which ramifies along U ∩ Y with the
given indices ~b.
Definition 3.2. The orbifold (X, Y, ~b) is called uniformizable if there is a simply connected global covering manifold, or uniformization, of X with the given
ramification data (Y, ~b).
Remark 3.3. Often when one speaks of uniformization in classical settings it
is understood that all the bj = ∞ (i.e., only cusps occur). We distinguish this
from the definition given above by calling this more restrictive notion classical
uniformization. For emphasis we will often refer to uniformization where bj is
allowed to be finite as well as ∞ as orbifold uniformization.
Definition 3.4. Let (X, Y, ~b) be an orbifold and M its uniformization. The
multivalued inverse map X → M of the projection M → X is called the developing
map, uniquely determined up to the group Aut(M ) of holomorphic automorphisms
of M .
For our application, we take X = P1 (C), Y = a finite set of points, M = the
upper half plane H, and Aut(M ) = P SL(2, R) ≃ P U (1, 1).
3.2. Schwarzian derivatives, uniformizing differential equations, and
automorphic functions.
Definition 3.5. The Schwarzian derivative {w; x} of a nonconstant smooth
function w(x), with respect to x, is defined to be
{w; x} =

3(w′′ )2 − 2w′ w′′′
.
4(w′ )2

Proposition 3.6 ([Yos], Proposition 4.1.1). The Schwarzian derivative satisfies “P GL(2, C)-invariance”:




aw + b
a b
; x = {w; x} , for all
∈ P GL(2, C)
c d
cw + d
Definition 3.7. A function w(x) is called P GL(2, C)-multivalued if any two
branches of w(x) are related by a projective transformaion.

8

CHARLES F. DORAN

An immediate corollary of Proposition 3.6 is
Corollary 3.8. If a function w = w(x) is P GL(2, C)-multivalued, then the
Schwarzian derivative {w; x} is single valued.
Proposition 3.9 ([Yos], Proposition 4.2). Let x and w be the coordinates of
X and M respectively. There are two linearly independent solutions u1 and u2 of
the equation
d2 u
− {w(x); x}u = 0
dx2
with single valued coefficients such that w(x) = u1 (x)/u2 (x).

(3.1)

Definition 3.10. The differential equation (3.1) is called the (orbifold) uniformizing differential equation, or Schwarzian differential equation, of the orbifold
(X, Y, ~b).
An immediate corollary of Proposition 3.9 is
Corollary 3.11. The projective solution of the uniformizing differential equation of the orbifold (X, Y, ~b) is the developing map w(x).
Let Γ ⊂ P SL(2, R) be a discrete subgroup such that Γ \ H∗ is compact (i.e., a
Fuchsian group of the first kind). In our applications we will be primarily interested
in a particular class of orbifold uniformizing differential equations associated to such
groups Γ with Γ \ H∗ of genus zero.
Definition 3.12. A function f (τ ) on the upper half plane H is an automorphic
function for Γ if
f (γτ ) = f (τ ) , for all γ ∈ Γ and for all τ ∈ H ,

(i.e., invariance) and there are well defined limits of f (τ ) as τ approaches parabolic
vertices (i.e., f (τ ) is meromorphic at each cusp of Γ).
Definition 3.13. A univalent automorphic function f for a genus zero Fuchsian group is called a Hauptmodul.
The covering map for the uniformization H → Γ \ H∗ is a Hauptmodul if Γ is
genus zero.
Theorem 3.14 ([Leh], Theorem 6A). Let Γ be a Fuchsian group of the first
kind. If f, g are automorphic functions for Γ, then they satisfy an algebraic equation
with complex coefficients.

P(f, g) = 0

Definition 3.15. Such an algebraic equation satisfied by a pair of automorphic
functions f and g for Γ is known classically as a modular equation. Warning: Often
in the literature this name is reserved for the particular case of modular equations
relating the modular function J(τ ) and J(n · τ ), n ∈ N.
Corollary 3.16 ([Leh], Theorem 6B). If there is a univalent automorphic
function f for Γ (i.e., one to one on the fundamental domain), then every automorphic function for Γ is a rational function of f .

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

9

Suppose we are given a pair of genus zero groups Φ ⊆ Γ (finite index) with
respective Hauptmoduln f , g. Then the rational function R(z) from Corollary 3.16
expresses g in terms of f :
g = R(f ) .
Definition 3.17. The rational function R(z) is called the modular relation
between the Hauptmoduln f and g.
For several examples of modular relations between J(τ ) and Hauptmoduln of
certain modular groups with level structure, see [CY].
Remark 3.18. The orbifold uniformizing differential equation is, up to projective equivalence, the “pullback by R” of that for Γ \ H∗. In the next subsection
we describe necessary and sufficient conditions on a rational function for it to pullback one uniformizing differential equation to (the projective equivalence class of)
another.
3.3. Regular singular points and orbifold uniformization.
There is a particularly simple characterization of projective normal form equations which orbifold uniformize, given in terms of their characteristic exponents:
Lemma 3.19 ([Yos], p. 50). A second order Fuchsian differential equation in
projective normal form is an orbifold uniformizing differential equation if and only
if at each of its regular singular points the difference in characteristic exponents is
either 0 or 1/b for some b ≥ 2 ∈ Z.
As we have already indicated, it is important that we understand the behavior of
uniformizing differential equations under pullback. Suppose then that we pullback
a second order Fuchsian equation L2 f = 0, with
d
d2
+ P1 (x)
+ P2 (x) ,
2
dx
dx
by a rational function x = R(z).
L2 =

Proposition 3.20. The regular singular points of the pulled back equation
R∗ (L2 ) lie among the inverse image points of the regular singular points of the
original equation L2 and the extra ramification points of the rational function R(z).

and

Proof. This is a straightforward computation:

df
dR
df
=
dx
dz
dz

−2  2




d2 f
d f
df d2 R dR
dR
=
−
dx2
dz
dz 2
dz dz 2
dz
∗
so that the pullback R (L2 ) = 0 of the equation L2 f = 0 takes the form



2 !
 2 
dR
d2 f
dR
df
d R dR
P1 (R(z))
+ f P2 (R(z))
=0.
+
−
dz 2
dz
dz
dz 2
dz
dz
Thus the only poles in the coefficients can occur at points where P1 (R(z)) has one,
or where P2 (R(z)) has one, or at other places where dR/dz = 0 (i.e., the extra
ramification points of the R map).

10

CHARLES F. DORAN

Lemma 3.21. The characteristic exponents of a point in the inverse image as
above are exactly those of the point being pulled back times the order of ramification.
The characteristic exponents at an extra ramification point differ by an integer.
Proof. For simplicity assume that the singular point of L2 under consideration
is at x = 0. In general (in the absence of ramification) there are deg R(z) points
in the inverse image of 0, each with the same characteristic exponents as has L2
at 0. If ramification of R(z) occurs at an inverse image point z0 , then R(z) has a
multiple root there with multiplicity equal to the order of ramification. Thus the
characteristic exponents at z0 are those of L2 at 0 times this order of ramification.
At an extra ramification point z1 , i.e., a point in the inverse image of an ordinary
point of L2 (characteristic exponents 0, 1), the characteristic exponents are thus 0
and the ramification index of R(z) at z1 .
In light of Lemmas 3.19 and 3.21, we have
Theorem 3.22. Characterization of types of regular singular points of a pullback of an orbifold uniformizing differential equation by a rational function:
• The extra ramification points of the rational function are all apparent singularities.
• The points in the inverse image of logarithmic singularities of orbifold type
(i.e., those with equal characteristic exponents) are logarithmic singularities
of orbifold type.
• For a regular singular point in the inverse image of a finite order orbifold
point with characteristic exponent difference 1/b: if the characteristic exponent difference is integral (i.e., if b divides the ramification index), then the
regular singular point is apparent; if the characteristic exponent difference
is not integral (i.e., if b does not divide the ramification index), then the
singular point is generic.
Remark 3.23. Some comments on the proof: The regular singular points
which are extra ramification points have characteristic exponent difference an integer ≥ 2 (if the difference were equal to 1 this would be an ordinary point [Yos,
p. 23]). The characteristic exponent difference is rescaled by the degree of the rational function; if this difference is zero it remains so. In the last case, we can say
more about the characteristic exponent difference: by Lemma 3.21 we know that
this is the ramification degree r divided by b. The reduced form of this fraction
has numerator r/ gcd(r, b). If this equals 1, then such a point satisfies the orbifold
uniformization criterion with finite weight b/ gcd(r, b) for the pullback equation.
Theorem 3.22 can be interpreted as providing a characterization of the modular
relations between Hauptmoduln of a given genus zero Fuchsian group of the first
kind and its finite index subgroups.
4. Elliptic curve case: elliptic modular surfaces
We are now ready to consider the problem of orbifold uniformization by PicardFuchs equations for families of elliptic curves — the first case of Picard-Fuchs uniformization. We will obtain a simple characterization of elliptic surfaces with modular mirror maps in terms of Kodaira’s functional invariant. This rational function
assigns to each point in the base of an elliptic fibration the J-invariant of the corresponding elliptic curve fiber. Moreover, the projective normal form of the pullback

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

11

by the functional invariant of the uniformizing differential equation for the elliptic
modular function J(τ ) is the projective normal form of the Picard-Fuchs equation
of the elliptic fibration. Thus the mirror map is determined by the functional invariant, and using Theorem 3.22 we obtain a criterion for modularity of the mirror
map in terms of properties of the functional invariant alone. Finally, we indicate
how to use the modular relations between Hauptmoduln for genus zero subgroups
of P SL(2, Z) and J(τ ) to provide explicit algebraic expressions for elliptic modular
surfaces with specified modularity properties.
4.1. Weierstrass elliptic surfaces and Kodaira theory.
Definition 4.1. Let p : X → C be a flat proper map from a reduced irreducible C-scheme X to a complete, smooth curve C, such that every geometric
fiber is an irreducible curve of arithmetic genus one, i.e., each fiber is one of
1. an elliptic curve, or
2. a rational curve with a node, or
3. a rational curve with a cusp.
The total space X is normal, and the generic fiber of p is smooth. Assume further
that a section s : C → X is given, not passing through the nodes or cusps of the
fibers. Call the collection of such data (p : X → C, s) a Weierstrass fibration over
C. We may resolve the singularities of X to obtain an elliptic surface with section
p : X → C, called the induced elliptic surface.
In fact there is a canonical form for such a Weierstrass fibration, exhibiting X
as a divisor in a P2 -bundle over the base curve C.
Theorem 4.2 ([Mir1], Theorem (2.1)). Let Σ denote the given section of p,
i.e., Σ = s(C), a divisor on X which is taken isomorphically onto C by p. Let
L = p∗ [OX (Σ)/OX ]. Suppose that the general fiber of p is smooth. Then L is
invertible and X is isomorphic to the closed subscheme of P = P(L⊗2 ⊕ L⊗3 ⊕ OY )
defined by
y 2 z = 4x3 − g2 xz 2 − g3 z 3 ,
where
g2 ∈ Γ(C, L⊗−4 ) , g3 ∈ Γ(C, L⊗−6 ) ,
and [x, y, z] is the global coordinate system of P relative to (L⊗2 , L⊗3 , OC ). Moreover the pair (g2 , g3 ) is unique up to isomorphism, and the discriminant
g23 − 27g32 ∈ Γ(C, L⊗−12 )

vanishes at a point q ∈ C precisely when the fiber Xq is singular.
Definition 4.3. Let J denote the composition of the period morphism ω1 /ω0 :
C → H and the morphism J : H → P1 extending the classical modular function.
Kodaira calls this the functional invariant of π : X → C, i.e., J = J ◦ ω1 /ω0 .
Kodaira has classified the singular fiber types which can arise in Weierstrass
fibered elliptic surfaces by describing these configurations of rational curves.
Theorem 4.4 ([Kod]). The singular fibers which appear in a smooth minimal
elliptic surface fall into “types”: In (n ≥ 0), II, III, IV , In∗ (n ≥ 0), IV ∗ , III ∗ ,
and II ∗ . Let I0 denote a smooth elliptic fiber. The fiber of type I1 is a rational
curve with a single node. More generally, fibers of type In consist of a n-cycle of

12

CHARLES F. DORAN

intersecting rational curves for n ≥ 1. A fiber of type II is just a rational curve
with a single cusp. Type III fibers consist of two rational curves with a single point
of tangency. Fibers of type IV consist of three rational components intersecting
at a single point. There are also fibers of types In∗ , n ≥ 0, IV ∗ , III ∗ , and II ∗ ,
whose dual intersection graphs, minus in each case a multiplicity one component,
correspond to those graphs of Dynkin types Dn+4 , E6 , E7 , and E8 respectively.
We now recall how the Kodaira fiber types correlate with the ramification
behavior of the J -map.
Lemma 4.5 ([Mir2], Lemma IV.4.1). Let G = Xq be the fiber of π over q ∈ C.
1. If G has type II, IV , IV ∗ , or II ∗ , then J (q) = 0. Conversely, suppose that
J (q) = 0. Then
• G has type I0 or I0∗ if and only if m(J ) ≡ 0 mod 3.
• G has type II or IV ∗ if and only if m(J ) ≡ 1 mod 3.
• G has type IV or II ∗ if and only if m(J ) ≡ 2 mod 3.
2. If G has type III or III ∗ , then J (q) = 1. Conversely, suppose that J (q) =
1. Then
• G has type I0 or I0∗ if and only if m(J ) ≡ 0 mod 2.
• G has type III or III ∗ if and only if m(J ) ≡ 1 mod 2.
3. G has type In or In∗ with n ≥ 1 if and only if J has a pole at q of order n.

4.2. Picard-Fuchs equations of Weierstrass elliptic surfaces.
In this subsection we will describe the Picard-Fuchs differential equations for
a Weierstrass elliptic curve fibration. We first recall Griffiths’ approach, which
starts with a first order regular system from which the second order equation can
be determined. This is computationally convenient, but will not be so useful for
our later purposes. Ultimately, we will only care about properties of the projective
normal form of the Picard-Fuchs differential equation. For that reason we also
present Stiller’s approach by “pulling back by J ” which suffices to determine this.

Theorem 4.6 ([Sas], p. 304). Griffiths’ approach to computing Picard-Fuchs
yields
#

 " −1 d∆/dz

3δ
d
η1
η1
12
∆
2∆
=
−g2 δ
1 d∆/dz
η2
η2
dz
8∆

12

∆

where

and

∆(z) = g2 (z)3 − 27g3 (z)2 ,
dg3 (z)
dg2 (z)
− 2g2 (z)
,
δ(z) = 3g3 (z)
dz
dz
Z
Z
dx
xdx
η1 =
, η2 =
.
y
γ
γ y

Now we turn to Stiller’s “pulling back by the J -map” approach. Let X be a
complete smooth connected algebraic curve over C with function field C(X). Recall
that the uniformizing differential equation for the group P SL(2, Z) is
36x2 − 41x + 32
d2 f
+
f =0,
dx2
144x2 (x − 1)2
the projective normal form of the Picard-Fuchs equation of the family E of Example
2.6. Denote by ΛJ the projective normal form of the pullback equation J ∗ (Λ). By
an explicit computation one can show that
Λf =

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

13

Proposition 4.7. Given a Weierstrass fibration with functional invariant J ,
the projective normal form of the Picard-Fuchs differential equation and the equation
ΛJ are identical.
Actually, this can also be seen indirectly through Stiller’s classification of Kequations [Sti].
We now can recast the results of Lemma 4.5 above as describing the singular
fiber types associated to various regular singular points of the projective normal
form of Picard-Fuchs ΛJ , using Theorem 3.22.
Proposition 4.8. A regular singular point of ΛJ corresponds to a fiber of type
• In or In∗ , n ≥ 1 ⇔ the characteristic exponents are equal
• I0 or I0∗ ⇔ the difference in characteristic exponents is a nonnegative integer
• II or IV ∗ ⇔ the difference in characteristic exponents is 1/3 modulo integers
• III or III ∗ ⇔ the difference in characteristic exponents is 1/2 modulo integers
• IV or II ∗ ⇔ the difference in characteristic exponents is 2/3 modulo integers
4.3. Characterization and construction of elliptic surfaces with modular mirror maps.
The main result for elliptic curve families is now an immediate consequence
of the criterion for orbifold uniformization (Theorem 3.22) in the elliptic surface
setting:
Theorem 4.9. The projective normal form of the Picard-Fuchs equation of
a Weierstrass elliptic surface will orbifold uniformize if and only if there are no
apparent singularities and the functional invariant J (t) has zeros to orders = 1 or
≡ 0 mod 3 and ones to orders = 1 or ≡ 0 mod 2.
This already generalizes results of Stiller [Sti] on classical uniformization by
Picard-Fuchs differential equations, and Shioda [Shi] on elliptic modular surfaces.
In addition, this also answers a question of Harnad and McKay regarding the geometric nature of modular solutions to generalized equations of Halphen type [HM].
Furthermore, by interpreting geometrically the absence of extra ramification of
the functional invariant, we have this purely geometric characterization of modularity:
Corollary 4.10. The mirror map z(q) of a Weierstrass elliptic surface over
P1 is modular if and only if it is isolated in deformations which preserve the Kodaira
singular fiber types, and it contains no singular fibers of types IV or II ∗ .
Applying this result to the list of rational elliptic surfaces over P1 we obtain:
Theorem 4.11. Here is the complete list of rational elliptic modular surfaces,
i.e., elliptic surfaces over P1 with Euler characteristic 12, non-constant functional

14

CHARLES F. DORAN

invariant, and modular mirror maps, listed according to their singular fiber types:
I1 , II, III ∗
I2 , II, IV ∗
I1 , I2 , III ∗
I3 , III, III, III
I1 , I3 , IV ∗
I4 , II, III, III
I5 , II, II, III
I1 , I1 , I4∗
I2 , I2 , I2∗
I6 , II, II, II
I1 , I5 , III, III

I2 , I4 , III, III
I3 , I3 , III, III
I1 , I6 , II, III
I2 , I5 , II, III
I3 , I4 , II, III
I1 , I7 , II, II
I2 , I6 , II, II
I4 , I4 , II, II
I1 , I1 , I7 , III
I1 , I2 , I6 , III
I1 , I3 , I5 , III

I2 , I3 , I4 , III
I1 , I1 , I8 , II
I1 , I2 , I7 , II
I1 , I4 , I5 , II
I2 , I3 , I5 , II
I1 , I1 , I1 , I9
I1 , I1 , I2 , I8
I1 , I2 , I3 , I6
I1 , I1 , I5 , I5
I2 , I2 , I4 , I4
I3 , I3 , I3 , I3

Proof. Persson and Miranda [Per, Mir3] have cataloged the singular fiber
types of all rational elliptic surfaces over C. Miranda’s list is particularly convenient
to use for this application because it indicates as well the amount of excess ramification of the functional invariant associated to each combination of singular fibers.
Between the constraint on the singular fibers and lack of excess ramification of J
(both by Theorem 4.9), we are able to determine the above list of 33 types. Explicit
expressions for the mirror map in each case can be derived from the Weierstrass
canonical form of each elliptic surface. Since the number of singular fibers present
is 3 or 4, explicit Weierstrass presentations are available in the literature already:
see Schmickler-Hirzebruch for the 3 singular fibers cases [S-H], and Herfurtner for
the surfaces with 4 singular fibers [Her].
It seems appropriate to make some additional comments on the construction of
explicit algebraic elliptic modular surfaces over P1 as an application of these results.
Associated to any elliptic surface meeting the equivalent criteria of Theorem 4.9
and Corollary 4.10, there is a mirror map which is a Hauptmodul (un-normalized!)
of a genus zero (finite index) subgroup of P SL(2, Z). If we denote this Hauptmodul
by H, then we know that the functional invariant J expresses the modular function
J in terms of H, J(q) = J (H(q)), and the functional invariant defines a modular
relation between the two genus zero modular groups.
We know that the uniformizing differential equation Λ for P SL(2, Z) is also
the projective normal form of the Picard-Fuchs equation of the family of elliptic
curves E in Example 2.6. We can identify the base parameter s of that family with
the modular function J. The base parameter of the “pullback surface” obtained
by replacing J everywhere with J (H) in the equation for E is likewise identified
with H. Since we are provided with an explicit algebraic elliptic modular surface
with mirror map a Hauptmodul for P SL(2, Z), it is a simple matter to determine an
explicit algebraic elliptic surface with mirror map a Hauptmodul H for any specified
modular subgroup. We will return to this sort of “inverse construction” at the end
of the next section in the context of K3 surfaces and a question of Dolgachev.
5. Mn -polarized K3 surface case: Mirror-Moonshine
The next case of Picard-Fuchs uniformization is by one parameter families of
certain lattice polarized K3 surfaces. The direct motivation for considering this
case is of course the Mirror-Moonshine Conjecture of Lian-Yau [LY1]. In the first
subsection we recall the definition of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces and Dolgachev’s

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

15

results on their moduli. Next we show how classical Fuchsian ordinary differential
equation facts imply that the Picard-Fuchs equation of a family of such surfaces is
a “symmetric square”. After a brief overview of the Mirror-Moonshine Conjecture,
we carefully formulate the questions we want to answer in §5.3. A crucial tool, the
generalized functional invariant, is introduced in the next subsection. Finally, in
§5.5 we prove our results on commensurability and modularity of the mirror map
in the Mn -polarized K3 surface case.
5.1. Mn -polarized K3 surfaces.
See the paper in this volume by Verrill and Yui [VY] for a general discussion
of lattice polarized K3 surfaces after Dolgachev [Dol].
Let L be the K3 lattice
L = U ⊥ U ⊥ U ⊥ −E8 ⊥ −E8 .

Let M = h2ni. Since the lattice U represents any even integer, we can assume
M ⊂ U . Then
M ⊥ ≃ U ⊥ U ⊥ −E8 ⊥ −E8 ⊥ h−2ni =: Mn .

This lattice is denoted by M in [VY].
The global monodromy group of the “universal family” of K3 surfaces over the
(coarse) moduli space of K3 surfaces polarized by a rank 19 lattice Mn has been
determined by Dolgachev. Define to begin with



a b
Γ0 (n) :=
∈ P SL(2, Z) c ≡ 0 mod n ⊂ P SL(2, Z) .
c d
Definition 5.1. The element of order two

√ 
0 −1/ n
√
∈ P SL(2, R)
Fn =
n
0

in the normalizer of Γ0 (n) in P SL(2, R) is the Fricke involution.
Definition 5.2. The Fricke modular group of level n is the subgroup of P SL(2, R)
is generated by Γ0 (n) and Fn , and denoted by Γ0 (n)∗ .
Theorem 5.3 ([Dol], Theorem (7.1)). The coarse moduli space of K3 surfaces
polarized by Mn is:
KMn ≃ H/Γ0 (n)∗ .
For later convenience we recall
Proposition 5.4 ([Dol], Theorem (7.5)). Suppose that X0 (n)∗ is rational. Then
there exists a unique holomorphic function
Hn : H → C

such that
1. Hn is invariant with respect to Γ0 (n)∗
2. Hn has a Fourier expansion
∞
1 X
Hn (τ ) = +
ck q k , q = e2πıτ
q
k=1

16

CHARLES F. DORAN

3. the coefficients of the Fourier expansion are all integers
4. as a meromorphic function on X0 (n)∗ , the function hn has a simple point
at the cusp Γ0 (n)∗ · ∞ and generates the field of meromorphic functions on
X0 (n)∗ .
5.2. Picard-Fuchs equations of Mn -polarized K3 surface families.
Here we describe in some detail the symmetric square structure of the PicardFuchs equations of Mn -polarized K3 surface families.
Theorem 5.5 ([Sin], Lemma 3.1.(b)). Let L1 (y) and L2 (y) be homogeneous
linear differential polynomials with coefficients in C(t). Then there exists a homogeneous linear differential equation L3 (y) = 0 with coefficients in C(t) and solution
space the C-span of
{ν1 ν2 | L1 (ν1 ) = 0 and L2 (ν2 ) = 0} .
Definition 5.6. We call the operator L3 (y) constructed above the symmetric
product of L1 and L2 , and denote it by L1 sL2 . In fact, the operation is associative,
and we may further define Lsn for n ≥ 1 by Ls1 = L and Lsn = Lsn−1 sL. We
call Symn (L) = Lsn the nth symmetric power of L; conversely, L is the nth root of
Lsn .
Lemma 5.7 ([Sin], Lemma 4, p. 129). Let L(y) be a homogeneous linear differential polynomial with coefficients in C(t). Then L(y) = Lsn
2 (y) for some second
order homogeneous linear differential polynomial L2 (y) with coefficients in C(t) if
and only if there exists a fundamental set of solutions {y1 , . . . , yn+1 } of L(y) = 0
such that
2
yi yi+2 − yi+1
= 0 , i = 1, . . . , n − 1 .
Corollary 5.8. Let L(y) = 0 be a third order homogeneous linear equation
with coefficients in C(t). If there exists a nondegenerate homogeneous polynomial P
of degree 2 with constant coefficients and a fundamental set of solutions {y1 , y2 , y3 }
of L(y) = 0 such that P (y1 , y2 , y3 ) = 0, then L(y) is the second symmetric power of
a second order homogeneous linear differential equation with coefficients in C(t).
Proof. This follows easily from Lemma 5.7. By assumption, the fundamental
set of solutions satisfies a nondegenerate quadratic relation. Since all such quadrics
in P2 (C) are projectively equivalent to
y1 y3 − y22 = 0

the criterion of the lemma applies and L(y) is a symmetric square.
Assume that we have a second order Fuchsian ordinary differential equation
L2 f = 0 where
d
d2
L2 = 2 + P1 (t) + P2 (t) .
dt
dt
The second order equation L2 f = 0 is equivalent to the system of first order differential equations
 ′
f = g
g ′ = −P2 f − P1 g

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

17

with {f, g} as fundamental solutions. Observe that

{f n , f n−1 g, . . . , f g n−1 , g n }

forms a set of fundamental solutions for the n-th symmetric power L = Lsn
2 . The
following result describes a system of first order differential equations for L with
these fundamental solutions.
Theorem 5.9 ([Lee], Theorem 2). If f and g satisfy


 

d
f
f
0
1
=
,
g
g
−P2 −P1
dt

then we have



fn





fn



 f n−1 g 
 f n−1 g 



d 




..
..
 ,
 = A

.
.



dt 
 f g n−1 
 f g n−1 
gn
gn
where A = (aij ) is an (n + 1) × (n + 1) matrix such that
ak,k
ak,k+1
ak+1,k
ai,j

=
=
=
=

(1 − k)P1
n+1−k
−kP2
0

,
,
,
,

1≤k ≤n+1 ,
1≤k≤n,
1≤k≤n,
i > j + 1 or j > i + 1 .

Example 5.10. In particular, when n = 2, the case for a symmetric square, it
one rewrites the system as a single third order equation
Sym2 (L2 )f = f ′′′ + 3P1 f ′′ + (2P1 2 + 4P2 + P1 ′ )f ′ + (4P1 P2 + 2P2 ′ )f = 0 .
In this form it is easy to check, using the closed form expression for the projective normal form of a second order Fuchsian differential equation given in Example
2.16, that
Proposition 5.11. Let L2 be as above a second order Fuchsian ordinary differential operator, and let L = Sym2 (L2 ) be its symmetric square. Then the projective
normal form of L is the symmetric square of the projective normal form of L2 .
Remark 5.12. In fact, it is possible to provide an explicit description of the
relationship between the monodromy matrices of the second order “square root”
equation and those of the third order symmetric square equation. This is provided
by the faithful representation of SL(2, C) in SL(3, C) via the symmetric square
representation [Sin].
Finally, we see the relevance of all of this for Picard-Fuchs equations of our
Mn -polarized K3 surface families:
Theorem 5.13. The Picard-Fuchs equation of a family of Mn -polarized K3
surfaces is the symmetric square of a second order homogeneous linear Fuchsian
ordinary differential equation.
Proof. To begin with, the order of the Picard-Fuchs equation is equal to
the rank of the transcendental lattice, i.e., 22 − 19 = 3. By Dolgachev’s Torelli
theorem for lattice polarized K3 surfaces (specifically, the proof of Theorem 5.13

18

CHARLES F. DORAN

above) the period domain lies on a nondegenerate quadric in P2 . Thus, Corollary 5.8
implies that the third order Picard-Fuchs differential equation is in fact a symmetric
square.
There is another approach to proving this result which takes advantage of the
special geometric properties of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces, namely their presentation
as Shioda-Inose surfaces coming from a product of two elliptic curves linked by an
n-isogeny. See [Pet, VY] for more details.
5.3. The Mirror-Moonshine phenomenon.
In their first systematic investigations of mirror symmetry for one parameter
families of Calabi-Yau manifolds constructed via the “orbifold construction” [LY1],
Lian and Yau discovered that the reciprocal of the mirror maps for the K3 surfaces
they were studying agreed, up to an additive constant, with Thompson series in
the lists of Conway-Norton [CN]. The evidence was sufficiently strong that they
formulated
Conjecture 5.14 (Lian-Yau, [LY1, ICMP]). If z(q) is the mirror map for a
one parameter deformation of an algebraic K3 surface from an orbifold construction
which has a third order Picard-Fuchs equation, then, for some c ∈ Z, the q-series
1
+c
z(q)

is a Thompson series Tg (q) for some element g in the Monster.
In [LY2], Lian and Yau compute many more toric examples (including over a
dozen complete intersection examples), and note that the correspondence to monstrous groups persists. This suggested that the hypothesis regarding the “orbifold construction” should perhaps be weakened to the hypothesis “torically constructed”.
As noted in the proof of Theorem 5.13, for a family of lattice polarized K3
surfaces the condition of having a third order Picard-Fuchs equation is equivalent
to the family possessing a polarization by a lattice of rank 19. In other words, the
generic member of such a family will have Picard rank 19.
Furthermore, recall that a Thompson series is in particular a Hauptmodul for
some “monstrous” genus zero arithmetic group Γ, and that the various equivalent
Hauptmoduln are well-defined as generators of the function field of the rational
curve Γ \ H∗ only up to action of Γ. We see that in Conjecture 5.14 an equivalent
conclusion is that the mirror map is itself a Hauptmodul (unnormalized!) for some
monstrous Γ.
Before Conjecture 5.14 was even formulated, Beukers, Peters, and Stienstra
had computed the Picard-Fuchs equation of a particular family of Mn -polarized
K3 surfaces [BP, PS]. The mirror map was determined by Verrill and Yui [VY,
(V.2)]. It provides a counterexample to a “monstrous” generalization of the mirrormoonshine conjecture for torically constructed cases; although the mirror map is
commensurable to a monstrous Hauptmodul, it is not a monstrous Hauptmodul
itself.
This suggests the following two questions:
Commensurability: When is the mirror map commensurable to a Thompson
series?

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

19

Modularity: Can we characterize the families of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces
whose mirror maps are Hauptmoduln for genus zero subgroups of Γ0 (n)∗ ?
We will provide answers to each of these questions in §5.5.
5.4. Generalized functional invariant.
Definition 5.15. By analogy with the functional invariant of an elliptic surface, to any family of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces over a curve C we associate the
composition of the period morphism
Ω:C
z

→ H
7→ Ω1 (z)/Ω0 (z)

and the canonical projection onto the coarse moduli space
Hn : H → H/Γ0 (n)∗ ,
and call it the generalized functional invariant Hn = Hn ◦ Ω.
Lemma 5.16. The generalized functional invariant Hn is meromorphic.
Proof. This follows directly from the regularity of the singular points of Fuchsian differential equations and the meromorphicity of the Hauptmodul. The question is local; we will always assume we work with charts centered about 0. Consider
the second order (projective normal form of square root of) Picard-Fuchs differential equation on P1 with coordinate z. Let aρ denote the regular singular points.
Let Ω(z) be the multivalued holomorphic function from the complement of the aρ
to the upper half plane, Hn be the Hauptmodul viewed as a function from H to P1 ,
and Hn be the generalized functional invariant. There are two cases to consider:
the points aρ of finite or of infinite order monodromy.
If a point has finite order m monodromy, then as a function of z = σ m the period
m
Ω(σ ) is a single-valued holomorphic function of σ in a neighborhood 0 < σ < ǫ,
where ℑ(Ω(σ m )) > 0. In particular by Picard’s theorem the singularity is not
essential.
If the monodromy about an aρ is of infinite order, we can argue that the
singularity is not essential by bounding the rate of growth of Hn (z) = Hn (Ω(z)).
For appropriately chosen coordinate w centered about the singularity, by Frobenius’
method we know that w = O(z −m log z), so |w| < O(z −(m+1) ) as z → 0. Because
Hn (w) is a meromorphic function on Γ0 (n)∗ \ H∗ (and so on H∗ ), near a singular
point of Hn the rate of growth of Hn (w) equals O(w−r ) for some finite r > 0. Thus
|Hn (Ω(z))| < O(z −r(m+1) ), and Hn (z) does not have an essential singularity.
Thus the singularity is either removable or a pole, and H(z) is meromorphic.
5.5. Commensurability and modularity results.
We can now address the two main questions regarding the Mirror-Moonshine
conjecture for any family of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces over P1 : The first result
explains the relationship of the mirror map to Thompson series. The second characterizes the modularity properties of the mirror map.
5.5.1. Commensurability.
By checking the tables of Conway-Norton [CN], we find: If Γ0 (n)∗ is a genus
zero group with n 6= 49, 50, then it is monstrous, i.e., its Hauptmodul is a Thompson
series.

20

CHARLES F. DORAN

Suppose we are given an algebraic family of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces over P1 .
In particular the genus of Γ0 (n)∗ must be zero. The generalized functional invariant
is a rational function, Hn (z), such that
Hn (q) = Hn (z(q)) ,
i.e., it expresses the Hauptmodul for Γ0 (n)∗ as a rational function of the mirror map
z(q). If n 6= 49, 50, this means that there is a rational expression for a Thompson
series Hn (q) in terms of the mirror map z(q). In particular this shows that:
Lemma 5.17. The mirror map of a family of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces over P1
is commensurable with a Thompson series when n 6= 49, 50.
The groups Γ0 (49)∗ and Γ0 (50)∗ are two of Conway-Norton’s “ghosts”, i.e., nonmonstrous genus zero subgroups of Γ0 (n)∗ containing Γ0 (n). Their Hauptmoduln
are however still “replicable functions” in the sense of Conway-Norton, and lie
among the list of “monster-like” groups of Ferenbaugh [Fer]. So we can say:
Lemma 5.18. The mirror map of any family of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces over
P1 is commensurable with a replicable function (i.e., a Hauptmodul of a monster-like
group).
5.5.2. Modularity.
We wish now, by analogy with the elliptic curve case, to apply the general
criterion for pulling back orbifold uniformizing differential equations (Theorem 3.22)
to Mn -polarized K3 surface families. We replace the functional invariant with
the rational function Hn (z), our generalized functional invariant. The differential
equation ΛJ is replaced by the projective normal form of the square root of the
Picard-Fuchs differential equation of our one parameter family of Mn -polarized K3
surfaces.
As the uniformizing group for the “target” is now Γ0 (n)∗ , what order elliptic
points must be considered? In [Fer] it is indicated (page 55) that for the broader
class of groups G = Γ0 (n|h) + e1 , e2 , . . . , an elliptic point can only have order 2, 3,
4, or 6. We need to check that the “order of value” p of Hn (z) (i.e., the vanishing
order of Hn (z) − p) for each elliptic point satisfy the conditions of Theorem 3.22.
Theorem 5.19. The square root of the projective normal form of the PicardFuchs equation of a one parameter family of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces (with genus
zero Γ0 (n)∗ ) will orbifold uniformize a Zariski open subset of the base of the family
if and only if it has no apparent singularities, and for each elliptic point p ∈ X0 (n)∗ ,
Hn (z) − p vanishes to permissible orders as listed in Table 1.
Order of elliptic point p ∈ X0 (n)∗ Vanishing order Hn (z) − p
2
≡ 0 mod 2 or = 1 mod 2
3
≡ 0 mod 3 or = 1 mod 3
4
≡ 0 mod 4 or = 1 or 2 mod 4
6
≡ 0 mod 6 or = 1, 2, or 3 mod 6
Table 1. Vanishing orders permitting modular mirror maps

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

21

Proof. The argument here is virtually identical to that for elliptic curves. To
begin with we work with the square root of the projective normal form of PicardFuchs, a second order Fuchsian ordinary differential equation. Replace J(τ ) with
the normalized hauptmodul Hn (τ ) for the appropriate Γ0 (n)∗ . Replace the functional invariant J with the generalized functional invariant Hn . The inverse image
of a cusp under the generalized functional invariant is still a cusp and these are all
the cusps (finite index condition). A regular singular point in the inverse image
of an elliptic point is either an algebraic singularity, or an apparent singularity.
The algebraic singularities are permitted if and only if they are of the types listed
in Table 1. As before, the “extra” points at which dHn /dz = 0 are just the apparent singularities outside of the inverse image locus, or equivalently those for
which the characteristic exponents are distinct. Positivity and surjectivity of the
period morphism, and the fact that the universal cover of the complement of the
(non-apparent) singularities is H all follow from the same properties of the X0 (n)∗
orbifold.
We have thus characterized the Mirror-Moonshine phenomenon completely.
This characterization has the advantage that it is expressed purely in terms of
properties of the generalized functional invariant, and applies equally well to any
example family, toric or not.
Remark 5.20. As an application we can construct families of Mn -polarized
K3 surfaces which orbifold uniformize with specified monodromy groups. The only
constraint is that we must already have at hand an algebraic construction for a
family of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces with mirror map a Hauptmodul for the full
group Γ0 (n)∗ . This thus provides a partial answer to a question of Dolgachev
regarding the “inverse problem” (see [VY, (VI.2)]), reducing it to the case G =
Γ0 (n)∗ . In other words, the problem can be solved completely just by finding
explicit algebraic constructions of families of Mn -polarized K3 surfaces with mirror
maps equal to Hn (q).
As in the case of elliptic curve families, the starting point is that we know how
to pullback from the “universal family” with a given lattice polarization, to another
family with the same lattice polarization which orbifold uniformizes with a proper
subgroup as monodromy group. Assume for now that the subgroup is also of genus
zero.
As long as we have an algebraic presentation (e.g., as hypersurfaces, complete
intersections) for the universal family in the first place, then we can construct the
pullback family. The necessary pullback function is the rational function which
defines the modular relation for the Hauptmodul of the universal family as a rational function in the Hauptmodul of the second family (i.e., for the finite index
subgroup). Once again the general fact (Corollary 3.16 and subsequent remarks)
relating automorphic functions for genus zero groups provides this rational function.
Remark 5.21. A necessary condition on the projective normal form PicardFuchs equation for orbifold uniformization once again is that there be no apparent
singularities. There is a great deal of evidence to support the conjecture that no
apparent singularities arise in any torically constructed family of Calabi-Yau manifolds. Aside from the lack of counterexamples, there are other reasons to believe
such a conjecture (see the author’s work on geometric isomonodromic deformations,
[Dor]).

22

CHARLES F. DORAN

6. Generalizations
We comment now on generalizations of these Picard-Fuchs uniformization results in various directions, involving changes in the natures of both the fiber and
the base of the families considered. In each case, a complete discussion may be
found in [Dor2].
To begin with, we note that our results for Mn -polarized K3 surface families
immediately extend to the general rank 19 lattice polarized case. In particular, the
arguments from Fuchsian theory for the symmetric square structure of the PicardFuchs equation are independent of the particular rank 19 lattice chosen. What is
lacking in the general setting is a complete classification of the rank 19 lattices and
a specific description of monodromy groups.
It is possible to lift the convenient genus zero restriction on both the uniformizing groups and the bases of the families under consideration. Most of the arguments
given in determining the Picard-Fuchs uniformization criteria apply immediately
to the case of families of elliptic curves and Mn -polarized K3 surfaces over higher
genus curves. These criteria still imply that the mirror map is an automorphic
function for a (no longer genus zero) subgroup of the genus zero groups P SL(2, Z)
or Γ0 (n)∗ respectively, even though it is no longer a Hauptmodul. Modification of
the arguments to allow for Γ0 (n)∗ of genus higher than zero can be made as well.
Furthermore, there is an extension of our modularity criteria to certain multiparameter families of abelian varieties and K3 surfaces of various Picard ranks. In
particular, this can be applied to two-parameter families of K3 surfaces with Picard
rank 18 as studied in [VY, (VI.4)]. This case is particularly nice, as it is possible
to apply another old result of Fano to conclude that generic one-parameter “slices”
of such families will possess Picard-Fuchs equations of order four, built from two
distinct second order equations by tensor product. When the two-parameter family
is “modular”, with respect to the appropriate Hilbert modular group, the PicardFuchs equations on the one-parameter slices reflect this by being “bi-modular”,
i.e., each second order factor equation is independently modular. The example of
Hosono, [VY, (VI.4.1)], provides a nice illustration of this phenomenon.
For more on all of this, together with a discussion of the considerably more
subtle case of Calabi-Yau threefold families, see [Dor2].
References
[AB]

D. Anosov and A. Bolibruch, The Riemann-Hilbert Problem, Aspects of Mathematics,
Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn (1994).
[BPV] W. Barth, C. Peters and A. Van de Ven, Compact Complex Surfaces, Springer-Verlag
(1984).
[BP] J. Bertin and C. Peters, Variations of Hodge Structures, Calabi-Yau Manifolds, and Mirror
Symmetry, Introduction à la Théorie de Hodge, Panoramas et Synthèses, 3, Paris: Société
Mathématique de France (1996).
[CY] I. Chen and N. Yui, Singular Values of Thompson Series, Groups, Difference Sets, and the
Monster: Proceedings of a Special Research Quarter at the Ohio State University, Spring
1993, Ohio State University Mathematical Research Institute Publications 4, Walter de
Gruyter, New York (1996).
[CK] D. Cox and S. Katz, Mirror Symmetry and Algebraic Geometry, Mathematical Surveys
and Monographs, American Mathematical Society (1999).
[CN] J. Conway and S. Norton, Monstrous Moonshine, Bull. London Math. Soc. 11 (1979), no.
3, 308–339.
[Dol] I. Dolgachev, Mirror Symmetry for Lattice Polarized K3 Surfaces, Algebraic Geometry,
4. J. Math. Sci. 81 (1996), no. 3, 2599–2630.

PICARD-FUCHS UNIFORMIZATION

[Dor]

23

C. F. Doran, Picard-Fuchs Uniformization and Geometric Isomonodromic Deformations:
Modularity and Variation of the Mirror Map, Dissertation, Harvard University, Spring
1999.
[Dor2] C. F. Doran, Picard-Fuchs Uniformization and Modularity of the Mirror Map, in preparation.
[EMM] Essays on Mirror Manifolds, Ed. by S.-T. Yau, International Press, Hong Kong (1992).
[Fer] C. Ferenbaugh, The Genus-Zero Problem for n|h-Type Groups, Duke Math. J. 72 (1993),
no. 1, 31–63.
[HM] J. Harnad and J. McKay, Modular Solutions to Equations of Generalized Halphen Type,
solv-int/9804006.
[Her] S. Herfurtner, Elliptic Surfaces with Four Singular Fibres, Math. Ann. 291 (1991), no. 2,
319–342.
[HLY] S. Hosono, B. Lian and S.-T. Yau, Maximal Degeneracy Points of GKZ Systems, J. Amer.
Math. Soc. 10 (1997), no. 2, 427–443.
[ICMP] B. Lian and S.-T. Yau, Mirror symmetry, Rational Curves on Algebraic Manifolds and
Hypergeometric Series, Proceedings of International Congress of Mathematical Physics
(1994).
[Kod] K. Kodaira, On Compact Analytic Surfaces, II, Ann. of Math. (2) 77 (1963), 563–626.
[Lee] M.-H. Lee, Picard-Fuchs Equations for Elliptic Modular Varieties, Appl. Math. Letters 4
(1991), no. 5, 91–95.
[Leh] J. Lehner, Discontinuous Groups and Automorphic Functions, Mathematical Surveys,
Number VIII, American Mathematical Society (1964).
[LY1] B. Lian and S.-T. Yau, Arithmetic Properties of Mirror Map and Quantum Coupling,
Comm. Math. Phys. 176 (1996), no. 1, 163–191.
[LY2] B. Lian and S.-T. Yau, Mirror Maps, Modular Relations and Hypergeometric Series II,
Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 46 (1996) 248-262.
[Mir1] R. Miranda, The Moduli of Weierstrass Fibrations over P1 , Math. Ann., 255, no. 3, 379–
394 (1981).
[Mir2] R. Miranda, The Basic Theory of Elliptic Surfaces, Dottorato di Ricerca in Matematica.
ETS Editrice, Pisa (1989).
[Mir3] R. Miranda, Persson’s List of Singular Fibers for a Rational Elliptic Surface, Math. Z.
205 (1990), no. 2, 191–211.
[MSI] Mirror Symmetry I, Ed. S.-T. Yau, American Mathematical Society–International Press
(1998). This is the second edition of [EMM] above.
[Per] U. Persson, Configurations of Kodaira Fibers on Rational Elliptic Surfaces, Math. Z. 205
(1990), no. 1, 1–47.
[Pet] C. Peters, Monodromy and Picard-Fuchs Equations for Families of K3-Surfaces and Elliptic Curves, Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4) 19 (1986), no. 4, 583–607.
[PS]
C. Peters and J. Stienstra, A Pencil of K3-Surfaces Related to Apéry’s Recurrence for
ζ(3) and Fermi Surfaces for Potential Zero, Arithmetic of Complex Manifolds (Erlangen,
1988), 110–127, Lecture Notes in Math., 1399, Springer, Berlin (1989).
[Sas] T. Sasai, Monodromy Representations of Homology of Certain Elliptic Surfaces, J. Math.
Soc. Japan, Vol. 26, No. 2, 296–305 (1974).
[S-H] Schmickler-Hirzebruch, Elliptische Flächen über P1 (C) mit drei Ausnahmefasern und die
hypergeometrische Differentialgleichung, Schriftenreihe des Mathematischen Instituts der
Universität Münster, Ser. 2, 33. Universität Münster, Mathematisches Institut, Münster
(1985).
[Shi] T. Shioda, On Elliptic Modular Surfaces, J. Math. Soc. Japan, Vol. 24, 20–59 (1972).
[Sin] M. Singer, Algebraic Relations Among Solutions of Linear Differential Equations: Fano’s
Theorem, Amer. J. Math., 110, no. 1, 115-143 (1988).
[Sti]
P. Stiller, On the Uniformization of Certain Curves, Pacific J. Math., 107, no. 1, 229–244
(1983).
[Var] V. Varadarajan, Meromorphic Differential Equations, Exposition. Math. 9 (1991), no. 2,
97–188.
[VY] H. Verrill and N. Yui, Thompson Series, and the Mirror Maps of Pencils of K3 Surfaces,
contribution to this proceedings.
[Voi] C. Voisin, Symétrie Miroir, Panoramas et Synthèses, 2, Paris: Société Mathématique de
France (1996).

24

CHARLES F. DORAN

[Yos]

M. Yoshida, Fuchsian Differential Equations. With special emphasis on the Gauss-Schwarz
theory, Aspects of Mathematics, E11. Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn, Braunschweig (1987).

Department of Mathematics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
E-mail address: doran@math.harvard.edu

