                                                                        ELLIPTIC SURFACES

                                                               MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

                                                 Abstract. This survey paper concerns elliptic surfaces with section. We
arXiv:0907.0298v3 [math.AG] 9 Jul 2010




                                                 give a detailed overview of the theory including many examples. Emphasis is
                                                 placed on rational elliptic surfaces and elliptic K3 surfaces. To this end, we
                                                 particularly review the theory of Mordell-Weil lattices and address arithmetic
                                                 questions.




                                                                                  Contents
                                           1. Introduction                                                                             1
                                           2. Elliptic curves                                                                          3
                                           3. Elliptic surfaces                                                                        7
                                           4. Singular fibres                                                                         10
                                           5. Base change and quadratic twisting                                                      17
                                           6. Mordell-Weil group and Néron-Severi lattice                                            22
                                           7. Torsion sections                                                                        32
                                           8. Rational elliptic surfaces                                                              38
                                           9. Extremal rational elliptic surfaces                                                     42
                                           10. Semi-stable elliptic surfaces                                                          45
                                           11. Mordell-Weil lattice                                                                   48
                                           12. Elliptic K3 surfaces                                                                   58
                                           13. Arithmetic of elliptic K3 surfaces                                                     72
                                           14. Ranks of elliptic curves                                                               84
                                           References                                                                                 88



                                                                             1. Introduction
                                           Elliptic surfaces are ubiquitous in the theory of algebraic surfaces. They play
                                         a key role for many arithmetic and geometric considerations. While this feature
                                            Date: February 22, 2010.
                                            2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 14J27; Secondary 06B05, 11G05, 11G07,
                                         11G50, 14J20, 14J26, 14J28.
                                            Key words and phrases. Elliptic surface, elliptic curve, Néron-Severi group, singular fibre,
                                         Mordell-Weil group, Mordell-Weil lattice, Tate algorithm, K3 surface.
                                            Partial funding from DFG under grant Schu 2266/2-2 and JSPS under Grant-in-Aid for
                                         Scientific Research (C) No. 20540051 is gratefully acknowledged.
                                                                                        1
2                        MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

has become ever more clear during the last two decades, extensive survey papers
and monographs seem to date back exclusively to the 80’s and early 90’s.
   Hence we found it a good time to comprise a detailed overview of the theory
of elliptic surfaces that includes the recent developments. Since we are mainly
aiming at algebraic and in particular arithmetic aspects, it is natural to restrict
to elliptic surfaces with sections. Albeit this deters us from several interesting
phenomena (Enriques surfaces to name but one example), elliptic surfaces with
section are useful in general context as well since one can always derive some
basic information about a given elliptic surface without section from its Jacobian
(cf. [31]; for the general theory see e.g. [50] and the references therein).
   While we will develop the theory of elliptic surfaces with section in full gener-
ality, we will put particular emphasis on the following three related subjects:
       • rational elliptic surfaces,
       • Mordell-Weil lattices,
       • elliptic K3 surfaces and their arithmetic.
Throughout we will discuss examples whenever they become available.
   Elliptic surfaces play a prominent role in the classification of algebraic surfaces
and fit well with the general theory. As we will see, they admit relatively sim-
ple foundations which in particular do not require too many prerequisites. Yet
elliptic surfaces are endowed with many different applications for several areas of
research, such as lattice theory, singularities, group theory and modular curves.
   To get an idea, consider height theory. On elliptic curves over number fields,
height theory requires quite a bit of fairly technical machinery. In contrast, elliptic
surfaces naturally lead to a definition of height that very clear concepts and proofs
underlie. In particular, it is a key feature of elliptic surfaces among all algebraic
surfaces that the structure of their Néron-Severi groups is well-understood; this
property makes elliptic surfaces accessible to direct computations.
   Throughout the paper, we will rarely give complete proofs; most of the time,
we will only briefly sketch the main ideas and concepts and include a reference
for the reader interested in the details. There are a few key references that should
be mentioned separately:

    textbooks on elliptic curves:       Cassels [10], Silverman [106], [107]
    textbooks on algebraic surfaces:    Mumford [58], Beauville [5], Shafarevich [86],
                                        Barth-Hulek-Peters-van de Ven [4]
    textbook on lattices:               Conway-Sloane [12]

    references for elliptic surfaces:   Kodaira [37], Tate [113], Shioda [93],
                                        Cossec-Dolgachev [15], Miranda [53]
   Elliptic surfaces form such a rich subject that we could not possibly have
treated all aspects that we would have liked to include in this survey. Along the
same lines, it is possible, if not likely that at one point or another we might have
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  3

missed an original reference, but we have always tried to give credit to the best of
our knowledge, and our apologies go to those colleagues who might have evaded
out attention.

                              2. Elliptic curves
   We start by reviewing the basic theory of elliptic curves. Let K denote a field;
that could be a number field, the real or complex numbers, a local field, a finite
field or a function field over either of the former fields.
Definition 2.1. An elliptic curve E is a smooth projective curve of genus one
with a point O defined over K.
  One crucial property of elliptic curves is that for any field K ′ ⊇ K, the set of
K -rational points E(K ′ ) will form a group with origin O. Let us consider the
  ′

case K = C where we have the following analytic derivation of the group law.
2.1. Analytic description. Every complex elliptic curve is a one-dimensional
torus. There is a lattice
                    Λ ⊂ C of rank two such that E ∼
                                                  = C/Λ.
Then the composition in the group is induced by addition in C, and the neutral
element is the equivalence class of the origin. We can always normalise to the
situation where
                         Λ = Λτ = Z + τ Z,     im(τ ) > 0.
For later reference, we denote the corresponding elliptic curve by
(1)                              Eτ = C/Λτ .
Two complex tori are isomorphic if and only if the corresponding lattices are
homothetic.
2.2. Algebraic description. Any elliptic curve E has a model as a smooth
cubic in P2 . As such, it has a point of inflection. Usually a flex O is chosen as
the neutral element of the group law. It was classically shown how the general
case can be reduced to this situation (cf. for instance [10, §8]).
  By Bezout’s theorem, any line ℓ intersects a cubic in P2 in three points P, Q, R,
possibly with multiplicity. This fact forms the basis for defining the group law
with O as neutral element:
Definition 2.2. Any three collinear points P, Q, R on an elliptic curve E ⊂ P2
add up to zero:
                              P + Q + R = O.
  Hence P +Q is obtained as the third intersection point of the line through O and
R with E. The hard part about the group structure is proving the associativity,
but we will not go into the details here.
4                     MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

2.3. Weierstrass equation. Given an elliptic curve E ⊂ P2 , we can always find
a linear transformation that takes the origin of the group law O to [0, 1, 0] and
the flex tangent to E at O to the line ℓ = {z = 0}. In the affine chart z = 1, the
equation of E then takes the generalised Weierstrass form
(2)           E:     y 2 + a1 x y + a3 y = x3 + a2 x2 + a4 x + a6 .
Outside this chart, E only has the point O = [0, 1, 0]. The lines through O are
exactly ℓ and the vertical lines {x = const} in the usual coordinate system. The
indices refer to some weighting (cf. 2.6).
   Except for small characteristics, there are further simplifications: If char(K) 6=
2, then we can complete the square on the left-hand side of (2) to achieve a1 =
a3 = 0. Similarly, if char(K) 6= 3, we can assume a2 = 0 after completing the cube
on the right-hand side of (2). Hence if char(K) 6= 2, 3, then we can transform E
to the Weierstrass form
(3)                       E:     y 2 = x3 + a4 x + a6 .
   The name stems from the fact that the Weierstrass ℘-function for a given
lattice Λ satisfies a differential equation of the above shape. Hence (℘, ℘′ ) gives
a map from the complex torus Eτ to its Weierstrass form with a4 , a6 expressed
through Eisenstein series in τ .

2.4. Group operations. One can easily write down the group operations for an
elliptic curve E given in (generalised) Weierstrass form. They are given as rational
functions in the coefficients of K-rational points P = (x1 , y1 ), Q = (x2 , y2) on E:

        operation      generalised Weierstrass form       Weierstrass form
          −P              (x1 , −y1 − a1 x1 − a3 )           (x1 , −y1 )

                       x3 = λ2 + a1 λ − a2 − x1 − x2      x3 = λ2 − x1 − x2
          P +Q
                        y3 = −(λ + a1 )x3 − ν − a3         y3 = −λx3 − ν
Here y = λ x + ν parametrises the line through P, Q if P 6= Q, resp. the tangent
to E at P if P = Q (under the assumption that Q 6= −P ).

2.5. Discriminant. Recall that we require an elliptic curve to be smooth. If E
is given in Weierstrass form (3), then smoothness can be phrased in terms of the
discriminant of E:
(4)                         ∆ = −16 (4 a34 + 27 a26 ).
For the generalised Weierstrass form (2), the discriminant can be obtained by
running through the completions of square and cube in the reverse direction. It
is a polynomial in the ai with integral coefficients (cf. [113, §1]).
Lemma 2.3. A cubic curve E is smooth if and only if ∆ 6= 0.
                                 ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  5

2.6. j-invariant. We have already seen when two complex tori are isomorphic.
In this context, it is important to note that the Weierstrass form (3) only allows
one kind of coordinate transformation:
(5)                           x 7→ u2 x,   y 7→ u3 y.

Such coordinate transformations are often called admissible. An admissible trans-
formation affects the coefficients and discriminant as follows:
                    a4 7→ a4 /u4,   a6 7→ a6 /u6 ,   ∆ 7→ ∆/u12 .
It becomes clear that the indices of the coefficients refer to the respective expo-
nents of u which we consider as weights. All such transformation yield the same
so-called j-invariant:
                                           (4 a4 )3
                               j = −1728            .
                                             ∆
Theorem 2.4. Let E, E ′ be elliptic curves in Weierstrass form (3) over K. If
E∼= E ′ , then j = j ′ . The converse holds if additionally a4 /a′4 is a fourth power
and a6 /a′6 is a sixth power in K, in particular if K is algebraically closed.
  The extra assumption of the Theorem is neccessary, since we have to consider
quadratic twists. For each d ∈ K ∗ ,
(6)                    Ed :    y 2 = x3 + d2 a4 x + d3 a6 .
defines an elliptic curve with j ′ = j. However,√the isomorphism E ∼
√                                                                  = Ed involves
  d, thus it is a priori only defined over K( d). The two elliptic curves with
extra automorphisms in 2.7 moreover admit cubic (and thus sextic) resp. quartic
twists.

2.7. Normal form for given j-invariant. We want to show that for any field
K and any fixed j ∈ K, there is an elliptic curve E over K with j-invariant j.
For this purpose, we will cover j = 0 and 123 separately in the sequel.
Definition 2.5 (Normal form for j). Let j ∈ K \ {0, 123}. Then the following
elliptic curve in generalised Weierstrass form has j-invariant j:
                                             36           1
(7)               E:    y 2 + x y = x3 −          3
                                                    x−         .
                                           j − 12      j − 123
 The remaining two elliptic curve are special because they admit extra auto-
morphisms. They can be given as follows:
                j=0:           y 2 + y = x3 ,           char(K) 6= 3,
                j = 123 :      y2      = x3 + x,        char(K) 6= 2.
6                     MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

2.8. Group structure over number fields. The results for elliptic curves over
number fields motivated many developments in the study of elliptic surfaces. We
give a brief review of some of the main results.
   In view of Faltings’ theorem [24], elliptic curves can be considered the most
intriguing curves if it comes to rational points over number fields. Namely, a
curve of genus zero has either no points at all, or it has infinitely many rational
points and is isomorphic to P1 . On the other hand, curves of genus g > 1 have
only finitely many points over any number field. Elliptic curves meanwhile feature
both cases:
Theorem 2.6 (Mordell-Weil). Let E be an elliptic curve over a number field K.
Then E(K) is a finitely generated abelian group:
(8)                       E(K) ∼= E(K)tor ⊕ Zr .
   One of the main ingredients of the proof is a quadratic height function on the
K-rational points. For elliptic surfaces, the definition of such a height function
will feature prominently in the theory of Mordell-Weil lattices. In fact, the height
arises naturally from geometric considerations (cf. 11).
   There are two basic quantities in the Mordell-Weil theorem: the torsion sub-
group and the rank of E(K). The possible torsion subgroups can be bounded
in terms of the degree of K by work of Mazur and Merel (cf. [52]). Meanwhile it
is an open question whether the ranks are bounded for given number fields K. In
fact, elliptic surfaces prove a convenient tool to find elliptic curves of high rank
by specialisation, as we will briefly discuss in section 14.
   For fixed classes of elliptic surfaces, one can establish analogous classifications,
bounding torsion and rank. The case of rational elliptic surfaces will be treated
in Cor. 11.8.
2.9. Integral points. If we want to talk about integral points on a variety, we
always have to refer to some affine model of it. For elliptic curves, we can use
the Weierstrass form (3) or the generalised Weierstrass form (2) for instance.
Theorem 2.7 (Siegel). Let E be an elliptic curve with some affine model over
Q. Then #E(Z) < ∞.
  We will see that the same result holds for elliptic surfaces under mild conditions.
In fact, we can even allow bounded denominators without losing the finiteness
property.
2.10. Bad places. On a similar note, one can consider the set of bad places v for
an elliptic curve over a global field K. Here E attains a singularity or degenerates
over the residue field Kv ; this behaviour is called bad reduction. In case K is a
number fields, one usually refers to the bad primes.
  Since the bad places divide the discriminant by Lemma 2.3, any elliptic curve
has good reduction outside a finite set of bad places. The following finiteness
result for elliptic curves over Q addresses the inverse problem:
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                    7

Theorem 2.8 (Shafarevich). Let S be a finite set of primes in Z. Then there are
only finitely many elliptic curves over Q up to Q-isomorphism with good reduction
outside S.
  This result also generalises to elliptic surfaces under mild conditions which will
appear quite naturally in the following (cf. 6.12). In fact, Shafarevich’s original
idea of proof generalises to almost all cases. The generalisation is based on the
theory of Mordell-Weil lattices as we will sketch in 11.18.
                              3. Elliptic surfaces
   In this section, we introduce elliptic surfaces. We explain the interplay with
elliptic curves over one-dimensional function fields using the generic fibre and the
Kodaira-Néron model. The central ingredient is the identification of sections of
the surface and points on the generic fibre.
3.1. We shall define elliptic surfaces in a geometric way. Therefore we let k = k̄
denote an algebraically closed field, and C a smooth projective curve over k.
Later on, we will also consider elliptic surfaces over non-algebraically closed fields
(such as number fields and finite fields); in that case we will require the following
conditions to be valid for the base change to the algebraic closure.
Definition 3.1. An elliptic surface S over C is a smooth projective surface S
with an elliptic fibration over C, i.e. a surjective morphism
                                    f:   S → C,
such that
   (1) almost all fibres are smooth curves of genus 1;
   (2) no fibre contains an exceptional curve of the first kind.
   The second condition stems from the classification of algebraic surfaces. An
exceptional curve of the first kind is a smooth rational curve of self-intersection
−1 (also called (−1)-curve). Naturally, (−1)-curves occur as exceptional divisors
of blow-ups of surfaces at smooth points. In fact, one can always successively
blow-down (−1)-curves to reduce to a smooth minimal model.
   In the context of elliptic surface, we ask for a relatively minimal model with
respect to the elliptic fibration. The next example will show that an elliptic
surface need not be minimal as an algebraic surface when we forget about the
structure of the elliptic fibration.
3.2. Example: Cubic pencil. Let g, h denote homogeneous cubic polynomials
in three variables. Unless g and h have a common factor or involve only two of
the coordinates of P2 in total, the cubic pencil
                          S = {λ g + µ h = 0} ⊂ P2 × P1 .
defines an elliptic surface S over P1 with projection onto the second factor. This
surface is isomorphic to P2 blown up in the nine base points of the pencil. This
8                     MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

is visible from the projection onto the first factor. The exceptional divisors are
not contained in the fibres: they will be sections.
   If the base points are not distinct, then S has ordinary double points as sin-
gularities. In this case, the minimal desingularisation gives rise to the elliptic
surface associated to the cubic pencil.
   For instance, the normal form for given j-invariant from 2.7 is seen as a cubic
pencil with parameter j after multiplying its equation by (j − 123 ). Thus the
associated elliptic surface S is rational with function field k(S) = k(x, y). The
pencil has a multiple base point at [0, 1, 0]; the multiplicity is seven if char(k) 6=
2, 3, and nine otherwise. We will check in 4.7 how these multiplicities account for
a singular fibre with many components.
3.3. Sections. A section of an elliptic surface f : S → C is a morphism
                      π: C→S         such that    f ◦ π = idC .
The existence of a section is very convenient since then we can work with a
Weierstrass form (3) where we regard the generic fibre E as an elliptic curve
over the function field k(C). In particular, this implies that the sections form an
abelian group: E(k(C)). Here we choose one section as the origin of the group
law. We call it zero section and denote it by O.
  In order to exploit the analogies with the number field case, we shall employ
the following conventions throughout this paper:
  Conventions:
   (1) Every elliptic surface has a section.
   (2) Every elliptic surface S has a singular fibre. In particular, S is not iso-
        morphic to a product E × C.




                                                                    X

                                                         O
                                                                     ❄

                                       r                            C
           Figure 1. Elliptic surface with section and singular fibres

  In terms of the Weierstrass form (3), the second convention guarantees that the
coefficients are not contained in the ground field k, but that they really involve
                                 ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                     9

the function field k(C). We will discuss elliptic surfaces without singular fibres
briefly in relation with minimal Weierstrass forms (cf. 4.8, 4.9).
   The assumption of a section is fairly strong. In fact, it rules out a number
of surfaces that we could have studied otherwise. For instance, every Enriques
surface admits an elliptic fibration, albeit never with section. However, we can
always pass to the Jacobian elliptic surface. This process guarantees the existence
of a section and preserves many properties, for instance the Picard number. The
Jacobian of an elliptic fibration on an Enriques surface is a rational elliptic surface.

3.4. Interplay between sections and points on the generic fibre. An el-
liptic surface S over C (with section) gives rise to an elliptic curve E over the
function field k(C) by way of the generic fibre. Explicitly, a section π : C → S
produces a k(C) rational point P on E as follows: Let Γ denote the image of C
under π in S. Then P = E ∩ Γ.
   If we return to the example of a cubic pencil, then the base points will in
general give nine sections, i.e. points on the generic fibre E. Choosing one of
them as the origin for the group law, we are led to ask whether the other sections
give independent points. In general, this turns out to hold true (cf. 8.8).
   Conversely, let P be a k(C)-rational point on the generic fibre E. A priori, P
is only defined on the smooth fibres, but we can consider the closure Γ of P in
S (so that Γ ∩ E = P ). Restricting the fibration to Γ, we obtain a birational
morphism of Γ onto the non-singular curve C.
                                     f |Γ : Γ → C
By Zariski’s main theorem, f |Γ is an isomorphism. The inverse gives the unique
section associated to the k(C)-rational point P .

3.5. Kodaira-Néron model. Suppose we are given an elliptic curve E over the
function field k(C) of a curve C. Then the Kodaira-Néron model describes how
to associate an elliptic surface S → C over k to E whose generic fibre returns
exactly E.
   At first, we can omit the singular fibres. Here we remove all those points from
C where the discriminant ∆ vanishes (cf. (4)). Denote the resulting punctured
curve by C ◦ . Above every point of C ◦ , we read off the fibre – a smooth elliptic
curve – from E. This gives a quasi-projective surface S ◦ with a smooth elliptic
fibration
                                  f ◦ : S◦ → C ◦.
Here one can simply think of the Weierstrass equation restricted to C ◦ (after
adding the point at ∞ to every smooth fibre). It remains to fill in suitable
singular fibres at the points omitted from C.
   For instance, if the Weierstrass form (3) defines a smooth surface everywhere,
then all fibres turn out to be irreducible. The singular fibres are either nodal or
cuspidal rational curves:
10                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA




                      Figure 2. Irreducible singular fibres

   If the surface is not smooth somewhere, then we resolve singularities minimally.
We will give an explicit description of the desingularisation process in the next
section where we study Tate’s algorithm in some detail. We will also recall
Kodaira’s classification of the possible singular fibres.
   We conclude this section with a very rough discussion of the uniqueness of the
Kodaira-Néron model. Assume we have two desingularisations S, S̃ which are
relatively minimal with respect to the elliptic fibration over C:
                              S ∼bir S ◦ ∼bir S̃
                                ց          ւ
                                     C
By assumption there is a birational morphism
                                    S − − → S̃.
The surface classification builds on the fact that every birational morphism is a
succession of smooth blow-ups and blow-downs. By construction, the desingular-
isations S and S̃ are isomorphic outside the singular fibres. But then the fibres
do not contain any (−1)-curves, since the surfaces are relatively minimal. Hence
S∼ = S̃, and we have proven the uniqueness of the Kodaira-Néron model.

                               4. Singular fibres
   We have seen that the main difference between an elliptic surface and its generic
fibre consists in the singular fibres. In this section, we discuss the classification
of singular fibres. This centers around Tate’s algorithm. We will mainly focus on
the case outside characteristics 2, 3, but also mention pathologies in characteristic
p such as wild ramification.
4.1. Classification. For complex elliptic surfaces, the singular fibres were first
classified by Kodaira [37]. The fibre type is determined locally by the monodromy.
In the general situation which includes positive characteristic, Néron pioneered
a canonical way to determine the singular fibres [59]; later Tate exhibited a
simplified algorithm that is valid over perfect fields [113]. It turns out that there
are no other types of singular fibres than already known to Kodaira. Except for
                                  ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 11

characteristics 2 and 3, the fibre types are again determined by very simple local
information.
   The case of non-perfect base fields has recently been analysed by M. Szydlo
[110]. In characteristics 2 and 3, Tate’s algorithm can fail as there are new
types of singular fibres appearing. Here we will only consider perfect base fields
and follow Tate’s exposition [113] (see also [107]). It will turn out that all the
irreducible components of a singular fibre are rational curves. If a singular fibre
is irreducible, then it is a rational curve with a node or a cusp. In Kodaira’s
classification of singular fibres, it is denoted by type I1 resp. II.
   If a singular fibre is reducible, i.e. with more than one irreducible components,
then each irreducible component is a smooth rational curve with self-intersection
number -2 (a (-2)-curve) on the elliptic surface. Reducible singular fibres are
classified into the following types:
       • two infinite series In (n > 1) and I∗n (n ≥ 0), and
       • five types III, IV, II∗ , III∗ , IV∗ .
   In general, an elliptic surface can also have multiple fibres. For instance, this
happens for Enriques surfaces. In the present situation, however, multiple fibres
are ruled out by the existence of a section.

4.2. Tate’s algorithm. In the sequel, we shall sketch the first few steps in Tate’s
algorithm to give a flavour of the ideas involved. For simplicity, we shall only
consider fields of characteristic different from two. Hence we can work with an
extended Weierstrass form
(9)                        y 2 = x3 + a2 x2 + a4 x + a6 .
Here the discriminant is given by
(10)           ∆ = −27 a26 + 18 a2 a4 a6 + a22 a24 − 4 a32 a6 − 4 a34 .
Recall that singular fibres are characterised by the vanishing of ∆. Since we
can work locally, we fix a local parameter t on C with normalised valuation v.
(This set-up generalises to the number field case where one studies the reduction
modulo some prime ideal and picks a uniformiser.)
   Assume that there is a singular fibre at t, that is v(∆) > 0. By a translation
in x, we can move the singularity to (0, 0). Then the extended Weierstrass form
transforms as
(11)                     y 2 = x3 + a2 x2 + t a′4 x + t a′6 .
If t ∤ a2 , then the above equation at t = 0 describes a nodal rational curve. We
call the fibre multiplicative. If t | a2 , then (11) defines a cuspidal rational curve
at t = 0. We refer to additive reduction. The terminology is motivated by the
group structure of the rational points on the special fibre. In either situation, the
special point (0, 0) is a surface singularity if and only if t|a′6 .
12                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

4.3. Multiplicative reduction. Let t ∤ a2 in (11). From the summand a32 a6 of
∆ in (10), it is immediate that (0, 0) is a surface singularity if and only if
                                        v(∆) > 1.
If v(∆) = 1, then (0, 0) is only a singularity of the fibre, but not of the surface.
Hence the singular fibre at t = 0 is the irreducible nodal rational curve given by
(11), cf. Fig. 2. Kodaira introduced the notation I1 for this fibre type. So let us
now assume that v(∆) = n > 1. We have to resolve the singularity at (0, 0) of
the surface given by (11).
   This can be achieved as follows: Let m = ⌊ n2 ⌋ be the greatest integer not
exceeding n/2. Then translate x such that tm+1 |a4 :
(12)                   y 2 = x3 + a2 x2 + tm+1 a′4 x + a6 .
Then v(∆) = n is equivalent to v(a6 ) = n. Now we blow-up m times at the point
(0, 0). The first (m − 1) blow-ups introduce two P1 ’s each. These exceptional
divisors are locally given by
                                     y ′2 = a2 (0) x′2 ,
                                    p
so they will be conjugate over k( a2 (0))/k. This extension appears on the nodal
curve in (11)pas the splitting field of the tangents to the singular point. According
to whether a2 (0) ∈ k, one refers to split and non-split multiplicative reduction.
  After each blow-up, we continue blowing up at (0, 0), the intersection of the
exceptional divisors. At the final step, the local equation of the special fibre is
                           y 2 = a2 (0) x2 + (a6 /t2m )(0).
This describes a single rational component, if n = 2m is even, or again two
components if n = 2m + 1 is odd. At any rate, the blown-up surface is smooth
locally around t = 0. In total, the desingularisation has added (n − 1) rational
curves of self-intersection −2. Hence the singular fibre consists of a cycle of n
rational curves, meeting transversally. Following Kodaira, we refer to this fibre
type as In .


                                                              ...
              I2                      ❆✁                      ✁     ❆ In (n > 3)
                                      ✁ ❆ I3                 ✁       ❆
                                     ✁ ❆                    ✁ n comp ❆
                                    ✁     ❆              ❆✁             ❆✁
                                  ✁                         ❆          ✁
                                 ✁         ❆                         ✁
                                               ❆❆            ❆
                             ✁                                ❆ ... ✁


                   Figure 3. Singular fibre of type In (n > 1)
                                                   ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                13

4.4. Additive reduction. We now let t | a2 in (11). We have to distinguish
whether (0, 0) is a surface singularity, i.e. whether t | a′6 . If the characteristic is
different from 2 and 3, then this is equivalent to
                                                       v(∆) > 2.
In characteristics 2 and 3, however, the picture is not as uniform. It is visible from
(10) that v(∆) ≥ 3 if char(k) = 3. In characteristic 2, one even has v(∆) ≥ 4
in case of additive reduction. This is due to the existence of wild ramification
which we will briefly comment on in section 4.6. In any characteristic, if (0, 0) is
a smooth surface point, then the singular fibre is a cuspidal rational curve – type
II, cf. Fig. 2.
   If (0, 0) is a surface singularity, we sketch the possible singular fibres resulting
from the desingularisation process. There are three possibilities for the excep-
tional divisor of the first blow-up:
     (1) a rational curve of degree two, meeting the strict transform of the cuspidal
         curve tangentially in one point;
     (2) Two lines, possibly conjugate in a quadratic extension of k, meeting the
         strict transform of the cuspidal curve in one point;
     (3) a double line.
In the first two cases, we have reached the desingularisation and refer to type
III resp. IV. The third case requires further blow-ups, each introducing lines of
multiplicity up to six and self-intersection −2. The resulting non-reduced fibres
are visualised in the following figure. Multiple components appear in thick print.
Unless they have a label, their multiplicity will be two.


                                                                    ✘
                                                                 ✘✘✘
                                                                                              ∗
                             ❆          ✁                                I∗0    3
                                                                                  ✘
                                                                                  ❳  IV
                                                                                ✘✘✘❳❳
         III                            ✁ IV                       ✘✘               ❳
                                 ❆                               ✘✘
                                    ✁
                                  ❆✁                                              ✘
                                                                                  ❳
                                                                                ✘✘✘❳❳
                                                                                    ❳
                                  ✁❆                             ❳❳               ✘
                                                                                  ❳
                                 ✁ ❆                             ❳❳❳❳             ✘
                                                                                ✘✘ ❳❳
                                                                                    ❳
                             ✁          ❆❆                         ❳❳


     4                       6
 3             III∗      4                   II∗                  ✁✁
                                                                        I∗1      ✡✡
                                                                                         I∗n (n > 1)
                                                                 ✁             ✡.
                                                                               .. (n + 1) double comp
                                                            ❆✁
                                             3                   ❆             ❏
 3                       5                                        ❆❆            ❏❏
                                   4


                      Figure 4. Reducible additive singular fibres
14                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

4.5. Additive fibres in characteristics different from 2,3. If the character-
istic differs from 2 and 3, then we can determine the type of the singular fibre
directly from the discriminant and very few local information – as opposed to
having to go through Tate’s algorithm in full detail. In essence, this is due to the
Weierstrass form (3) that we can reduce to. Here we only have to consider the
vanishing orders of a4 and a6 next to ∆.
   Assume that v(∆) = n > 0. Then the type of the singular fibre can be read off
from the following table. A single entry means equality, while otherwise we will
indicate the possible range of valuations.

                            fibre type  (v(a4 )    v(a6 )
                                           0        ≥0
                                 I0                  0
                                         ≥0
                            In (n > 0)     0         0
                                  II      ≥1         1
                                 III       1        ≥2
                                 IV     (≥ 2         2
                                           2        ≥3
                                 I∗0                 3
                                         ≥2
                            ∗
                           In−6 (n > 6)    2         3
                                     ∗
                                IV        ≥3         4
                                III∗       3        ≥5
                                    ∗
                                 II       ≥4         5
          Table 1. Vanishing orders of Weierstrass form coefficients


  The following relation is worth noticing:
                          (
          components of         v(∆)        in the multiplicative case;
(13) #                      =
           singular fibre       v(∆) − 1 in the additive case;

4.6. Wild ramification. The notion of wild ramification was introduced to ac-
count for a possible discrepancy in the additive case in (13). Following Ogg’s
foundational paper [68] (see also [76]), we denote the index of wild ramification
at an additive fibre by δv :
              δv = v(∆) − 1 − #(components of an additive fibre).
In characteristics 2 and 3, some additive fibre types imply higher vanishing order
of ∆ than predicted by the number of components. We have seen this happen
for the cuspidal rational curve (type II) in 4.4. In order to determine the fibre
type, one thus has to go through Tate’s algorithm – as opposed to the other
                                  ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                15

characteristics where we read off the fibre type from discriminant and Weierstrass
form.
   If a fibre type admits wild ramification, then the index of wild ramification is
unbounded within all elliptic surfaces. By a simple case-by-case analysis (see [84,
Prop. 16]), one finds the following information on the index of wild ramification
where again a single entry indicates equality:

                             fibre type p = 2 p = 3
                             In (n ≥ 0)    0    0
                                    II    ≥2   ≥1
                                   III    ≥1    0
                                   IV      0   ≥1
                                 (n = 1)   1    0
                             I∗n (n 6= 1) ≥ 2   0
                                  IV∗      0   ≥1
                                  III∗    ≥1    0
                                   II∗    ≥1   ≥1
                       Table 2. Wild ramification indices


4.7. Example: Normal form for j. Recall the normal form for an elliptic
surface of given j-invariant from 2.7. Here we want to interpret the normal form
itself as an elliptic surface over P1 with parameter j = t. Hence the generic fibre
is defined over k(t). An integral model is obtain from (7) by a simple scaling of
x and y as in (5):
(14)     S:    y 2 + (t − 123 ) x y = x3 − 36 (t − 123 )3 x − (t − 123 )5 .
We want to determine the singular fibres of S. We first compute the discriminant
                                  ∆ = t2 (t − 123 )9 .
The fibres at 0 and 123 are easily seen to be additive. If char(k) 6= 2, 3, then
translations in y and subsequently x yield the Weierstrass form
                              1                     1
                   y 2 = x3 −    t (t − 123 )3 x +     t (t − 123 )5 .
                              48                   864
By the above table, the singular fibres have type II at t = 0 and III∗ at t = 123 .
If char(k) = 2 or 3, then the two additive fibres collapse so that vt=0 (∆) = 11.
Tate’s algorithm only terminates at fibre type II∗ . Hence there is wild ramification
of index 1. The extra fibre component is due to the collision of all base points
mod 2 and 3 (cf. 3.2).
   In any characteristic, we obtain an integral model at ∞ by the variable change
(15)                  t 7→ 1/s,    x 7→ x/s2 , y 7→ y/s3 .
16                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

This results in the discriminant ∆ = s (1 − 123 s)9 . Since the vanishing order of
∆ at s = 0 is one, there has to be a singular fibre of type I1 , a nodal rational
curve.
4.8. Minimal Weierstrass form. From the table in section 4.5 we also see why
Tate’s algorithm terminates: If it returns none of the above fibre types, then
                              v(a4 ) ≥ 4,    v(a6 ) ≥ 6.
But then we can apply the change of variables
                                x 7→ t2 x,   y 7→ t3 y
to obtain an isomorphic equation that is integral at t. (For the generalised Weier-
strass form (2), this requires v(ai ) ≥ i after suitable translations of x, y.) Such
a transformation lets v(∆) drop by 12, hence it can only happen a finite num-
ber of times. We call this process minimalising and the resulting equation the
minimal Weierstrass form (locally at t = 0).
   The notion of minimality involves a little subtlety. Namely, we work in the
coordinate ring k[C] of a chosen affine open of the base curve C. For instance, if
the base curve C is isomorphic to P1 , then k[C] = k[t] and every ideal in k[C] is
principal. In consequence, an elliptic surface over P1 admits a globally minimal
Weierstrass form. In general, however, k[C] need not be a principal ideal domain,
and thus there might not be a globally minimal Weierstrass form.
   As a strange twist, the Tate algorithm itself can also have the converse effect
and make a minimal Weierstrass form non-minimal. For instance, in the multi-
plicative case the translation in x yielding (12) may well be non-minimal at ∞ if
m is big compared to the degrees of the coefficients ai (cf. 4.10).
4.9. Application: Elliptic surfaces without singular fibres. We give an
example of an elliptic surface without singular fibres which is nonetheless not
isomorphic to a product of curves. The example builds on the local nature of a
minimal Weierstrass form.
   Let C be a hyperelliptic curve of genus g(C) > 0. We can give C by a polyno-
mial h ∈ k[u] of degree at least three without multiple factors:
                                  C:    v 2 = h(u).
Let u0 denote any ramification point of the double cover C → P1 , so h(u) =
(u − u0 ) h′ . Consider the following elliptic surface S over C:
                     S:    y 2 = x3 + (u − u0 )2 x + (u − u0 )3 .
Then S has discriminant ∆ = c (u − u0 )6 , but S does not have a singular fibre at
(u0 , 0). The above Weierstrass form for S is not minimal at u0 , since locally h′ is
invertible. Hence we can write
                                        2 2       2 3
                              2    3     v           v
                       S: y =x +           ′
                                               x+         .
                                         h           h′
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 17

Then rescaling x, y eliminates the local parameter v. The resulting surface is
smooth and thus locally minimal at (u0 , 0).

4.10. Elliptic surfaces over the projective line. In this survey, we will mostly
consider elliptic surfaces with base curve P1 . Such surfaces have a globally mini-
mal generalised Weierstrass form. In terms of the Weierstrass form with polyno-
mial coefficients, minimality requires

                 v(a4 ) < 4 or v(a6 ) < 6      at each place of P1 .

After minimalising at all finite places, we fix the smallest integer n such that
deg(ai ) ≤ ni. As in 4.7, we derive a local equation at ∞ with coefficients

                                 a′i = sni ai (1/s).

Alternatively, we can homogenise the coefficients ai (t) as polynomials in two
variables s, t of degree n i. Then the discriminant is a homogeneous polynomial
of degree 12n. This approach leads to the common interpretation of the minimal
Weierstrass form of an elliptic surface over P1 with section as a hypersurface in
weighted projective space P[1, 1, 2n, 3n]. Here the non-trivial weights refer to x
and y respectively. This interpretation allows one to apply several results from
the general theory of hypersurfaces in weighted projective spaces to our situation
(cf. 14.1).
  The integer n has an important property: It determines how an elliptic surface
over P1 with section fits into the classification of projective surfaces. We let κ
denote the Kodaira dimension.
                 n=1        rational elliptic surface, κ = −∞,
                 n=2        K3 surface,                κ = 0,
                 n>2        honestly elliptic surface, κ = 1.
The invariant n is equal to the arithmetic genus χ which will be introduced in
6.7.
  In general, elliptic surfaces over curves of positive genus do also have Kodaira
dimension one. We will cover rational elliptic surfaces and elliptic K3 surfaces
with section in some detail in sections 8 and 12.


                 5. Base change and quadratic twisting
  This section is devoted to the study of base change as one of the most fun-
damental operations in the context of elliptic surfaces. There are immediate
applications to the problem of constructing specific elliptic surfaces that will re-
cur throughout this survey. Base change also motivates other considerations such
as quadratic twisting or inseparability.
18                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

5.1. Base change provides a convenient method to produce new elliptic surfaces
from old ones. The set-up is as follows: Suppose we have an elliptic surface
                                         f
                                     S −→ C.
In order to apply a base change, we only need another projective curve B mapping
surjectively to C. Formally the base change of S from C to B then is defined as
a fibre product:
                                 S ×C B −→ B
                                    ↓           ↓
                                             f
                                    S        −→ C
In practice, we simply pull-back the Weierstrass form (or in general the equation)
of S over C via the morphism B → C. Clearly this replaces smooth fibres by
smooth fibres.

5.2. Singular fibres under base change. The effect of a base change on the
singular fibres depends on the local ramification of the morphism B → C. Singu-
lar fibres at unramified points are replaced by a fixed number of copies in the base
change (the number being the degree of the morphism). If there is ramification,
we have to be more careful. Of course the vanishing orders of the polynomials of
the Weierstrass form and of the discriminant multiply by the ramification index.
This suffices to solve the base change problem for multiplicative fibres: a base
change of local ramification index d replaces a fibre of type In (n ≥ 0) by a fibre
of type Ind . For additive fibres, however, the pull-back of the Weierstrass form
might become non-minimal.
   In the absence of wild ramification, the singular fibre resulting from the base
change can be predicted exactly. For instance, if we have a Weierstrass form,
then this can be read off from the vanishing orders of a4 , a6 and ∆. In particular
it is also evident how often we have to minimalise.
   Depending on the index d of ramification modulo some small integer, Table 3
collects the behaviour of singular fibres without wild ramification:


 II, II∗ d mod 6 fibre        III, III∗ d mod 4 fibre     IV, IV∗ d mod 3 fibre
           1        II                    1      III                1       IV
           2       IV                     2       I∗0               2      IV∗
           3        I∗0                   3      III∗               3        I0
           4      IV∗                     4       I0        In∗
                                                                  d mod 2 fibre
           5       II∗                                              1      I∗nd
           6        I0                                              2      Ind
              Table 3. Singular fibres under ramified base change
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  19

   In the presence of wild ramification, the local analysis can be much more com-
plicated. We will see an example in 5.5. Confer [56] for a general account of that
situation.
   By inspection of the tables, additive fibres are potentially semi-stable: after
a suitable base change, they are replaced by semi-stable fibres, i.e. multiplicative
fibres of type In (n ≥ 0).

5.3. Base change by the j-map. Often it is convenient to consider the j-
invariant of an elliptic surface S over C as a morphism from C to P1 . To em-
phasise this situation, we will also refer to the j-map. Assume that j 6= const. If
j : C → P1 is separable, then it is unramified outside a finite sets of points. Usu-
ally the ramification locus includes 0 and 123 and often also ∞. Recall that these
are exactly the places of the singular fibres of the normal form for the j-invariant.
   Thus the question arises to which extent elliptic surfaces admit an interpre-
tation as base change from the normal form via the j-map. In this context, it
is crucial that the j-invariant determines a unique elliptic curve up to isomor-
phism only under the assumption that the ground field K is algebraically closed
(Thm. 2.4). Since here we work over function fields, there might in general be
some discrepancy between the given elliptic surface with j-map j and the base
change of the normal form by j. By 2.6, this discrepancy is related to quadratic
twisting.

5.4. Quadratic twisting. Two elliptic surfaces with the same j-map have the
same singular fibres up to some quadratic twist. In particular, the smooth fibres
are isomorphic over k̄, the algebraic closure of the ground field.
   If char(k) 6= 2, then any elliptic surface with section admits an extended Weier-
strass form (9). Hence quadratic twisting can be understood in analogy with (6):
                      Sd :   y 2 = x3 + da2 x2 + d2 a4 x + d3 a6 .
Here we point out the effect of a quadratic twist on the singular fibres. Again,
this can be read off directly from Tate’s algorithm:
                          ∗          ∗           ∗         ∗
(16)                In ↔ In , II ↔ IV , III ↔ III , IV ↔ II .
Note that any two elliptic surfaces that are quadratic twists of each other become
isomorphic after a suitable finite base change. From 5.2 and (16), it is immediate
that this only requires even ramification order at all twisted fibres.
   In characteristic 2, there is a different notion of quadratic twisting, related to
the Artin-Schreier map t 7→ t2 + t (see for instance [84, p. 10]).

5.5. Example: Quadratic base change of normal form for j. As in 4.7, we
consider the normal form for given j-invariant as an elliptic surface over P1 with
coordinate t. To look into an example we want to apply the following quadratic
20                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

base change
                                 π : P1 →   P1
                                     t 7→ t2 + 123 .
The base change ramifies at 123 and ∞. By 5.2, the base changed surface S ′ has
singular fibres II, II, I∗0 , I2 unless char(k) = 2, 3. To verify this, we pull back the
integral model (14) via π ∗ :
                        S′ :    y 2 + t2 x y = x3 − 36 t6 x − t10 .
This elliptic curve is not minimal at t = 0. A change of variables x 7→ x t2 , y 7→
y t3 yields the minimal form
                         S′ :    y 2 + t x y = x3 − 36 t2 x − t4
with I∗0 fibre at t = 0 and I2 at ∞. If char(k) 6= 2, then we can complete the
square on the left-hand side:
                                        1
                        S ′ : y 2 = x3 + t2 x2 − 36 t2 x − t4 .
                                        4
Now we can apply quadratic twists by choosing an even number of places in P1 .
For instance, twisting at 0 and α in effect moves the singular fibre of type I∗0 from
t = 0 to α:
                              1
              S̃ : y 2 = x3 + t (t − α) x2 − 36 (t − α)2 x − t (t − α)3 .
                              4
                        √
By choosing α = ±24 −3, we can also merge fibres of type II and I∗0 to obtain
type IV∗ . Similarly, twisting at 0 and ∞ results in a fibre of type I∗2 at ∞.
  We conclude by noting the singular fibres and ramification indices of S ′ in
characteristics 2 and 3. In either characteristic, S ′ has two singular fibres, one
of which at ∞ has type I2 . The other singular fibre at 0 has type III∗ with
ramification index one if char(k) = 2, and IV∗ with ramification index two if
char(k) = 3. Both claims are easily verified with Tate’s algorithm.
5.6. Construction of elliptic surfaces. The ideas from this section can also
be used in the reversed direction to construct elliptic surfaces over a given curve
C with prescribed singular fibres. Namely one has to find a polynomial map
                                         C → P1
whose ramification at 0, 123, ∞ is compatible with the singular fibres. Here com-
patibility might involve a quadratic twist. For instance, an elliptic surface over
P1 with singular fibres of types II, II, I∗2 comes from the normal form after the
base change in 5.5, but one has to apply the quadratic twist at 0 and ∞ after
the base change.
   As a special case, we are led to consider polynomial maps to P1 which are
unramified outside three points (usually normalised as 0, 1, ∞). These maps are
often called Belyi maps. Belyi proved that a projective curve can be defined over
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 21

a number field if and only if it admits a Belyi map. We will see in 10.2 how this
problem can be translated into a purely combinatorial question. Thus we will be
able to answer existence questions by relatively easy means.
5.7. Uniqueness. By 2.6, an elliptic curve is determined by its j-invariant if it is
defined over an algebraically closed field. With elliptic surfaces resp. curves over
function fields k(C), we have seen that quadratic twisting causes some serious
trouble. Obviously, another obstruction occurs when j is constant – despite
the surface not being isomorphic to a product. Such elliptic surfaces are called
isotrivial, see 9.8 for details.
   If on the other hand j is not constant, we deduce that the elliptic surface is
uniquely determined (up to k̄-isomorphism) by the pair (j, ∆). For semi-stable
surfaces (i.e. without additive fibres), this criterion can be improved as follows:
Theorem 5.1. Let S, S ′ denote semi-stable elliptic surfaces with section over the
same projective curve C. Then S and S ′ are isomorphic as elliptic surfaces if
and only if ∆ = u12 ∆′ for some u ∈ k ∗ .
  Over k̄, the theorem can be rephrased as an equality of divisors on the curve
C (again only valid for semi-stable elliptic surfaces):
                                   (∆) = (∆′ ).
Here we have to distinguish from isomorphisms of the underlying surfaces which
forget about the structure of an elliptic fibration. For instance, K3 surfaces may
very well admit several non-isomorphic elliptic fibrations (cf. 12.2).
5.8. Inseparable base change. Since the discriminant encodes the bad places
of an elliptic curve over a global field, Thm. 5.1 brings us back to the theme of
Shafarevich’s finiteness result for elliptic curves over Q (Thm. 2.8). A proof of
the function field analogue would only require to show that there are only finitely
many discriminant with given zeroes on the curve C. However, such a general
statement is bound to fail in positive characteristic. This failure is due to the
existence of inseparable base change.
   Namely, let the elliptic surface S → C be defined over the finite field Fq . Then
we can base change S by the Frobenius morphism C → C which raises coordinates
to their q-th powers. Clearly this does not change the set of bad places, but only
the vanishing orders of ∆. For instance, at the In fibres the vanishing orders are
multiplied by q. Hence the inseparable base change results in a fibre of type Iqn .
5.9. Conductor. We explain one possibility to take inseparability and wild ram-
ification into account. We associate to the discriminant ∆ a divisor N on the
base curve C which we call the conductor:
                               
          X                    0,
                                          if the fibre at v is smooth;
     N =      uv v with uv = 1,            if the fibre at v is multiplicative;
                               
          v∈C                   2 + δv , if the fibre at v is additive.
22                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

By definition (∆) − N is effective, in particular deg(∆) ≥ deg(N ). The two
degree are related by the following result:
Theorem 5.2 (Pesenti-Szpiro [73, Thm. 0.1]). Let S → C be a non-isotrivial
elliptic surface over F̄p . Let the j-map have inseparability degree e. Then
                      deg(∆) ≤ 6 pe (deg(N ) + 2g(C) − 2).
   In characteristic zero the above result has been known to hold after removing
the factor pe (see [91] and also [107, p. 287]). Once we understand the structure
of the Néron-Severi group of elliptic surfaces, we will apply the theorem to prove
a function field anlogue of Shafarevich’s finiteness result over Q in 6.12.

          6. Mordell-Weil group and Néron-Severi lattice
  In 3.4 we have seen how a rational point on the generic fibre gives rise to a
section on the corresponding elliptic surface and vice versa. In this section we in-
vestigate this relation in precise detail. Along the way, we will also compute many
fundamental invariants of elliptic surfaces such as canonical divisor, arithmetic
genus, Euler number, Betti and Hodge numbers.
6.1. We fix some notation and terminology: As usual, we let S → C be an
elliptic surface over k with generic fibre E over k(C). The K-rational points
E(K) form a group which is traditionally called Mordell-Weil group. We will
usually denote the points on E by P, Q etc.
   Each point P determines a section C → S which we interprete as a divisor
on S. To avoid confusion, we shall denote this curve by P̄ . Without further
distinguishing, we will also consider P̄ as an element in the Néron-Severi group
of S
                              NS(S) = {divisors}/ ≈ .
Here ≈ denotes algebraic equivalence. For instance, all fibres of the elliptic
fibration S → C are algebraically equivalent. The rank of NS(S) is called the
Picard number:
                                ρ(S) = rank(NS(S)).
By the Hodge index theorem, NS(S) has signature (1, ρ(S) − 1).
6.2. Mordell-Weil group vs. Néron-Severi group. We now state the three
fundamental results that relate the Mordell-Weil group and the Néron-Severi
group of an elliptic surface with section. All theorems require our assumption
that the elliptic surface has a singular fibre.
Theorem 6.1. E(K) is a finitely generated group.
  This result is a special case of the Mordell-Weil theorem, in generality for
abelian varieties over suitable global fields (cf. [45, §6], [85, §4]). Here we will
sketch the geometric argument from [93]. The first step is to prove the corre-
sponding result for the Néron-Severi group.
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  23

Theorem 6.2. NS(S) is finitely generated and torsion-free.
  The finiteness part is again valid in more generality for projective varieties as
a special case of the theorem of the base [45, §5]. On an elliptic surface, one
can use intersection theory to prove both claims (cf. Thm. 6.5). The connection
between Thm. 6.1 and 6.2 is provided by a third result:
Theorem 6.3. Let T denote the subgroup of NS(S) generated by the zero section
and fibre components. Then the map P 7→ P̄ mod T gives an isomorphism
                             E(K) ∼= NS(S)/T.
   The following terminology has established itself for elliptic surfaces: fibre com-
ponents are called vertical divisors, sections horizontal. In this terminology,
the above theorem states that NS(S) is generated by vertical and horizontal di-
visors (as opposed to involving multisections).



                            ✡
                           ✡
                          ✡
                     ❏✡                                             X
                     ✡❏
                          ❏
                           ❏
                            ❏                            O
                                                                    ❄

                                         r                          C
                   Figure 5. Horizontal and vertical divisors
  The idea here is to prove Thm.s 6.2 and 6.3, since then Thm. 6.1 follows
immediately. In the sequel, we sketch the main line of proof. Details can be
found in [93]. We will restrict ourselves to those ideas which shed special light
on elliptic surfaces or which are particularly relevant for our later issues.
6.3. Numerical Equivalence. On any projective surface, algebraic equivalence
implies numerical equivalence ≡ where we identify divisors with the same
intersection behaviour. Hence the intersection of divisors defines a symmetric
bilinear pairing on NS(S). It endows NS(S) (up to torsion) with the structure
of an integral lattice, the Néron-Severi lattice. The reader is referred to [12]
for generalities on lattices; note that in this survey we are only concerned with
non-degenerate lattices (which will sometimes be stated explicitly in order
to stress the condition, but often be omitted). In the following, we will use the
phrases Néron-Severi group and Néron-Severi lattice interchangeably.
Lemma 6.4. Modulo numerical equivalence, the Néron-Severi group is finitely
generated.
24                     MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

     The lemma is a direct consequence of the existence of the cycle map
                               γ:   NS(S) → H 2 (S).
Here one can work with ℓ-adic étale cohomology in general (ℓ a prime differ-
ent from the characteristic). In particular H 2 (S) is a finite-dimensional Qℓ -
vectorspace, equipped with cup-product which is a non-degenerate pairing with
values in H 4 (S) ∼= Qℓ . Notably, γ preserves the pairing. In consequence, the
kernel of γ comprises exactly the elements which are numerically equivalent to
zero. But then NS(S)/ ≡ embeds into a finite-dimensional vector space. Hence
this quotient is finitely generated and torsion free. Thus, Thm. 6.2 will follow
once we have proved the following result:
Theorem 6.5. On an elliptic surface, algebraic and numerical equivalence coin-
cide.
  This result is very convenient for practical reasons, since we can now solve
problems concerning divisor classes in NS(S) simply by calculating intersection
numbers.

6.4. The trivial lattice. Thm. 6.3 introduced the trivial lattice T , generated
by the zero section and fibre components. Since any two fibres are algebraically
equivalent, we only have to consider a general fibre and fibre components not met
by the zero section. We set up some notation for the remainder of this paper. As
                                          f
usual it refers to an elliptic surface S −→ C with zero section O.

 F       a general fibre
 Fv      the fibre f −1 (v) above v ∈ C
 mv      the number of components of the fibre Fv
 Σ       the points of C underneath singular fibres: Σ = {v ∈ C; Fv is singular}
 R       the points of C underneath reducible fibres: R = {v ∈ C; Fv is reducible}
 Θv,0    the component of Fv met by the zero section – the zero component
 Θv,i    the other components of Fv (i = 1, . . . , mv − 1)
 Tv      the lattice generated by fibre components in Fv not meeting the zero section:
         Tv = hΘv,i ; 1 ≤ i ≤ mv − 1i.
In this notation, the trivial lattice T ⊆ NS(S) is defined as the orthogonal sum
                                             M
(17)                          T = hŌ, F i ⊕   Tv .
                                           v∈R

Proposition 6.6. The divisor classes of {Ō, F, Θv,i ; v ∈ R, 1 ≤ i ≤ mv − 1}
form a Z-basis of T . In particular,
                                          X
                           rank(T ) = 2 +   (mv − 1).
                                           v∈R
                                     ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                        25

  To see that the given divisor classes form a basis, one can compute the inter-
section matrix M of T and verify that det(M) 6= 0. Here it suffices to consider
the separate summands from (17). The first summand has intersection form
                                     2 
                                      Ō 1
                                       1 0
This matrix has determinant −1 and signature (1, 1). We claim that all other
summands Tv are negative-definite even lattices, so that T has signature (1, 1 +
P
  v∈R (mv − 1)).

6.5. Dynkin diagrams. Recall that every component of a reducible fibre is a
rational curve of self-intersection −2. We associate a graph to each fibre by
drawing a vertex for each component and connecting two vertices by an edge for
each intersection point of the corresponding components. For instance, type In
for n > 1 gives a circle of n vertices, and the same applies to III (n = 2) and IV
(n = 3).
   It is an elementary observation going through all fibre types that these graphs
correspond exactly to the extended Dynkin diagrams Ãm , D̃m , Ẽm . One can re-
cover the Dynkin diagrams Am , Dm , Em by omitting the vertex corresponding to
the zero component and the edges attached to it. The following figure sketches
the Dynkin diagrams. The circles indicate components intersecting the zero com-
ponent (as opposed to the balls).


              A1                             A2                              An (n > 2)
              ❜                          ❜   ❜                     ❜   ...       ❜


              r    D4                    r        D5               r         Dn (n > 5)
          r   ❜    r                 r   r   ❜    r            r   r   ...       ❜   r


              ❜    E6                        r    E7                   r             E8
      r   r   r    r    r        r   r   r   r    r    ❜       r   r   r     r   r   r    ❜


                               Figure 6. Dynkin diagrams


Lemma 6.7. Each Dynkin diagram defines an even negative-definite lattice, de-
noted by the same symbol. The determinants are:
              det(An ) = (−1)n (n + 1), det(Dm ) = (−1)m 4 (m ≥ 4),

                        det(E6 ) = 3, det(E7 ) = −2,       det(E8 ) = 1.
26                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

   Note that in each case, the absolute value of the determinant equals the number
of simple components of the singular fibre (including the zero component). The
multiplicities ni of the other components of the singular fibre (which one can
compute with Tate’s algorithm) are uniquely determined by the condition
                     m                                   m
                                                                     !2
                      Xv −1                              Xv −1

          F ≈ Θ0 +          ni Θi , F 2 = F.Θj = Θ0 +          ni Θi    = 0.
                      i=1                                 i=1

The lattices An , Dn , En above are called the (negative) root lattices of type
An , . . . (cf. 11.13). The positive-definite lattices which are obtained from them
by changing the sign of the intersection form are also called the (positive) root
lattices, and they are often denoted by the same symbol (see e.g. [12]). It will be
clear from the context which (negative or positive) is meant in the statements in
this survey. Most of the time (such as in this section), we will refer to the negative
root lattices; but specifically in section 11, we define Mordell-Weil lattices in such
a way that they are positive-definite.
   Definite lattices have been classified to some extent. For instance, the root
lattice E8 with the two signs of the intersection form gives the unique positive-
definite and negative-definite even unimodular lattice of rank 8. Such classifi-
cations will play an important role in two areas: the study of rational elliptic
surfaces (cf. section 11) and the classification of elliptic fibrations on a given K3
surface (cf. 12.19).
6.6. Canonical divisor. In order to prove that algebraic and numerical equiv-
alence coincide on an elliptic surface S, it is useful to know the canonical divisor
KS . The following formula goes back to Kodaira for complex elliptic surfaces. A
characteristic-free proof was given in [9]. The statement involves the Euler char-
acteristic χ(S) = χ(S, OS ) which we will investigate further in the next section.
In this survey, we shall refer to χ = χ(S) as the arithmetic genus of S.
   N.B. In the theory of algebraic surfaces, the invariant pa = χ − 1 is usually
called the arithmetic genus, but we find it more convenient to adopt our definition
in this survey.
Theorem 6.8 (Canonical bundle formula). The canonical bundle of an elliptic
            f
surface S −→ C is given by
                                ωS = f ∗ (ωC ⊗ L−1 )
where L is a certain line bundle of degree −χ(S) on C. In particular, we have
                      KS ≈ (2g(C) − 2 + χ(S)) F, KS2 = 0.
   The main idea of proof is that KS is vertical. This comes from the fact that
F.KS = 0 by adjunction. Then one applies Zariski’s Lemma to show that KS
is a fibre multiple. Finally one computes the degree with the help of spectral
sequences and the Riemann-Roch theorem.
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  27

  As an application, we compute the self-intersection of any section by the ad-
junction formula:
Corollary 6.9. For any P ∈ E(K), we have P̄ 2 = −χ(S).
6.7. Arithmetic genus and Euler number. We want to review a formula
for the Euler number e(S) of an elliptic surface S. Here one can think of the
topological Euler number in case we are working over the complex numbers; in
general we work with the alternating sum of the Betti numbers, the dimensions
of the ℓ-adic étale cohomology groups.
   For the fibres of an elliptic surface, we thus obtain
                             
                             0,
                                          if Fv is smooth;
                     e(Fv ) = mv ,         if Fv is multiplicative;
                             
                             m + 1, if F is additive.
                                  v            v

By (13), this local Euler number of the fibre agrees exactly with the vanishing
order of the discriminant if there is no wild ramification. Otherwise it involves
a contribution from the index of wild ramification δv at v. Recall from 4.6 that
δv = 0 unless char(k) = 2, 3 and Fv is additive.
Theorem 6.10 ([15, Prop. 5.16]). For an elliptic surface S over C, we have
                                 X
                         e(S) =     (e(Fv ) + δv ).
                                      v∈C

   Here the sum is actually finite, running over the singular fibres of S → C,
i.e. v ∈ Σ. By assumption, the elliptic surface has a singular fibre, hence e(S) > 0.
As a corollary, we obtain the arithmetic genus χ(S) through Noether’s formula
                               12 χ(S) = KS2 + e(S).
Corollary 6.11. For an elliptic surface S, we have
                                     1
                              χ(S) =    e(S) > 0.
                                     12
  The proof of Thm. 6.5 now proceeds as follows. Assuming D ≡ 0, one shows
that KS − D is vertical using Riemann-Roch with χ(S) > 0 and Serre duality.
Then Lemma 6.7 implies that KS − D is algebraically equivalent to some fibre
multiple. By the canonical bundle formula, this also holds for D. But then the
degree has to be zero since O.D = 0 by assumption. Hence D ≈ 0.
  As we have seen, Thm. 6.5 implies Thm. 6.2. It remains to prove Thm. 6.3.
6.8. Sections vs. horizontal components. In order to prove Thm. 6.3, we
shall exhibit the inverse of the map
                              E(K) → NS(S)/T
                                 P 7→ P̄ mod T.
28                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

For this purpose, it will be convenient to view the generic curve E as a curve on
S. We start by defining a homomorphism
                                   Div(S) → Div(E)
as follows: Any divisor D on S decomposes into a horizontal part, consisting of
sections and multisections, and a vertical divisor consisting of fibre components:
                   D = D ′ + D ′′ , D ′ horizontal, D ′′ vertical.
Then the horizontal part D ′ and E intersect properly, giving a divisor on E of
degree D ′ .E. This (K-rational) divisor is called the restriction of D to E:
                            D|E := D ′ ∩ E ∈ Div(E).
In terms of linear equivalence ∼ (on E resp. S), it is easy to see that
                  D|E ∼E 0 ⇔ D ∼S D ′′ for some vertical D ′′ .
By Abel’s theorem for E over K, the divisor D thus determines a unique point
P ∈ E(K) by the following linear equivalence of degree zero divisors:
                           D|E − (D ′ .E) O ∼E P − O.
Writing ψ(D) = P , we obtain a homomorphism
                               ψ : Div(S) → E(K).
The kernel of ψ can be seen to be
        ker(ψ) = hD ∈ Div(S); D ≈ 0i + ZŌ + hD ∈ Div(S); D verticali.
Hence ψ induces the claimed isomorphism
                             ψ : NS(S)/T ∼
                                         = E(K).
Recall that we introduced the terminology “horizontal divisor” for sections on an
elliptic surface. The above construction identifies any divisor D (or its horizontal
component D ′ ) with the horizontal divisor P̄ .
   All these considerations will be made more explicit in section 11 in order to
endow the Mordell-Weil group (modulo torsion) with a lattice structure.
6.9. Picard variety. A crucial step in the proof of Thm. 6.3 concerns the Picard
varieties of the elliptic surface S and the base curve C. Recall that generally on a
projective variety X, the Picard variety Pic0 (X) arises as the following quotient:
            Pic0 (X) = hD ∈ Div(X); D ≈ 0i/hD ∈ Div(X); D ∼ 0i.
More specifically, if X is a curve, then D ≈ 0 ⇔ deg(D) = 0, and Pic0 (X) is the
Jacobian of X.
                                        f
  In the case of an elliptic surface S → C, pull-back with f ∗ defines an injection
                            f∗ :    Pic0 (C) ֒→ Pic0 (S),
since the section π : C → S provides a left inverse π ∗ . With the first bit of the
above consideration, one can in fact show that f ∗ is surjective:
                                 ELLIPTIC SURFACES                             29

Theorem 6.12. For an elliptic surface S over C with section, Pic0 (S) ∼
                                                                      = Pic0 (C).
6.10. Betti and Hodge numbers. From Thm. 6.12 (or [15, Cor. 5.2.2]), we
deduce that an elliptic surface S and its base curve C have the same first Betti
number:
                                 b1 (S) = b1 (C).
Then Poincaré duality allows us to express the second Betti number of S through
the Euler number:
                          b2 (S) = e(S) − 2 (1 − b1 (C)).
For a complex elliptic surface S, we can describe the Hodge diamond explicitly.
We shall give its entries, the dimensions
                             hi,j = dim H j (S, ΩiS ),
in terms of the genus of the base curve C and the arithmetic genus of S (or
equivalently the Euler number). For this we abbreviate
       g = g(C) = q(S), χ(S) = χ,        pg = pg (S) = h2,0 (S) = χ − 1 + g.
For the Euler number, we compare two expressions: e(S) = 12χ and the definition
of e(S) as alternating sum of Betti numbers to derive
                        e(S) = 12χ = 2χ − 2g + h1,1 (S).
Hence the Hodge diamond of a complex elliptic surface takes the shape
                                         1
                                  g               g
                            pg        10χ + 2g         pg
                                  g               g
                                         1

6.11. Picard number. As a corollary of Thm. 6.3, we obtain a formula for the
Picard number of an elliptic surface with section. Sometimes, this formula is
referred to as Shioda-Tate formula.
Corollary 6.13. Let S be an elliptic surface with section. Denote the generic
fibre by E. Then
                                          X
          ρ(S) = rank T + rank E(K) = 2 +     (mv − 1) + rank E(K).
                                                 v∈R

  Here we can also express the rank of the trivial lattice in terms of the Euler
number. From Prop. 6.6 and Thm. 6.10, we deduce
                X            X
         e(S) =     e(Fv ) =   (mv + δv ) + #{v ∈ Σ; Fv is additive}.
                 v∈Σ         v∈Σ
30                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

Hence we obtain
             rank T = e(S) − #{v ∈ Σ; Fv is multiplicative}
                                                                  X
                                 −2 #{v ∈ Σ; Fv is additive} −          δv .
                                                                  v∈Σ

     We conclude by recalling that over the complex numbers, Lefschetz’ bound

                                  ρ(S) ≤ h1,1 (S)

holds true, while in general, we only have Igusa’s inequality

                                   ρ(S) ≤ b2 (S).

With Cor. 6.13, these inequalities translate into estimates for the number of fibre
components that an elliptic surface of given Euler number may admit.

6.12. Finiteness. Combined with Thms 5.1 and 5.2, the results from this section
enable us to prove the following function field anlogue of Shafarevich’s finiteness
result over Q (Thm. 2.8):
Theorem 6.14. Assume that the field k is algebraically closed. Let C be a
projective curve over k and S a finite set of places on C. Up to isomorphism,
there are only finitely many elliptic surfaces S → C with section satisfying the
following conditions:
     (1) S has good reduction, i.e. smooth fibres outside S;
     (2) S → C is separable and not isotrivial: the j-map is not constant and
         separable;
     (3) there is no wild ramification.
  We shall only describe the proof in the semi-stable case. Let s = #S. Since ∆
has support ⊂ S, the conductor has degree deg(N ) ≤ s by semi-stability. Hence
Thm. 5.2 yields the bound

                        deg(∆) = e(S) ≤ 6(s + 2g(C) − 2).

This tells us how to bound the possible configurations of singular fibres – either
using the trivial bound from Thm. 6.10 (which is immanent in the above formula)
or the improved bounds from the previous section depending on the characteristic.
At any rate, there are only finitely many possible configurations and thus also
only finitely many possibilities for ∆. (The last fact relies on the specification of
the set S containing all bad places.) But by Thm. 5.1, each admissible choice of
∆ belongs to at most one semi-stable elliptic surface over C, if any.
   For a conceptual partial approach in the spirit of Shafarevich’s original proof
that is based on the theory of Mordell-Weil lattices, see 11.18.
                                  ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                   31

6.13. Example: Mordell-Weil group of the normal form. Let us return to
the normal form S for given j-invariant, considered as an elliptic surface over P1
with coordinate t. Since S can be written as a cubic pencil (cf. 3.2), it follows that
S is rational. At any rate, the singular fibres give e(S) = 12 and thus b2 (S) = 10
by the previous section. This gives an upper bound for the Picard number ρ(S)
which we will see immediately to be attained.
   We start by investigating the trivial lattice. By Cor. 6.9, we have Ō 2 =
−χ(S) = −1. Hence the sublattice of T generated by Ō and F is isomorphic
to h1i ⊕ h−1i. In consequence, the trivial lattice depends on the characteristic as
follows:                              (
                                        E7 , if char(k) 6= 2, 3;
                   T = h1i ⊕ h−1i ⊕
                                        E8 , if char(k) = 2, 3.
If char(k) = 2, 3, then T thus has rank ten and discriminant −1. Since NS(S) is
an integral lattice, these conditions imply NS(S) = T .
   In case char(k) 6= 2, 3, then T has only rank nine and discriminant 2. In
addition, we find the following section on the integral model (14) of S:
                                                √             !
                             1             3+2 2
                   P = − (t − 123 )2 ,             (t − 123 )3 .
                            36               216
This point is induced from one of the simple base point of the corresponding
cubic pencil – which has x = −1/36. It is easily checked that the other simple
base point induces −P . Hence we claim that E(K) = hP i. To prove this, we
consider the sublattice of NS(S) generated by P̄ and the trivial lattice.
   By Thm. 6.5, the study of sublattices of NS(S) basically amounts to the com-
putation of intersection numbers. In the affine chart (14), P̄ and Ō do not meet
since P is given by polynomials. On the other hand, one easily checks that also
in the chart at ∞, the section is polynomial. Indeed, on the integral model from
(15), the section is given as
                                                √              !
                            1             3 + 2  2
                 P = − (1 − 123 s)2 ,              (1 − 123 s)3 .
                           36               216
  Hence P̄ .Ō = 0. Using Tate’s algorithm, one finds that P meets the non-
zero simple component of the III∗ fibre. The resulting intersection matrix of size
10 × 10 has determinant −1. As before, we deduce that
                                  NS(S) = T + ZP̄ .
Thm. 6.3 then gives the claim E(K) = hP i.
   The above example indicates that the Tate algorithm might actually be needed
in order to find the fibre component met by a section. Of course, this will always
be a simple component, so for the present fibre type as well as I2 , II, III, II∗ , there
is not much choice, but for the remaining fibre types the task becomes non-trivial.
32                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

                              7. Torsion sections
  Obviously there is a substantial difference between torsion sections and so-
called infinite sections. On an elliptic surface, this can be detected lattice theo-
retically by the means of the previous chapter. In the following we will exploit
torsion sections in detail. They admit a rich theory specifically due to the con-
nection with universal elliptic curves, but they will also be interesting to us for
other reasons, for instance in the context of singular fibres or automorphisms of
surfaces.
7.1. In the previous example, we have seen an elliptic surface with a non-torsion
section in characteristics other than 2, 3. We will also refer to non-torsion sections
as infinite sections. Here’s how one can see that P is not torsion: Otherwise, we
would have mP = O for some integer m. But then m · P̄ ∈ T by Thm. 6.3. In
particular, adjoining P to T produces an overlattice of the same rank, i.e. rank
nine. Since the intersection matrix has rank ten, we obtain a contradiction.
  Conversely, the existence of a torsion section is equivalent to the property that
T does not embed primitively into NS(S). That is, the quotient NS(S)/T is not
torsion-free. Denote by T ′ the primitive closure of T inside NS(S):
                              T ′ = (T ⊗ Q) ∩ NS(S).
With this overlattice of T , we easily deduce the following statements:
Lemma 7.1. Let P ∈ E(K) be torsion. Then P̄ ∈ T ′ .
Corollary 7.2. In the above notation,
                                 E(K)tors ∼
                                          = T ′ /T.
7.2. Group structure of singular fibres. The structure of the Néron model
induces a group structure on all fibres, not only the smooth one. On a singular
fibre, the smooth points form an algebraic group scheme over the base curve.
Here the subgroup scheme of the identity component is
                Gm , if Fv is multiplicative;   Ga , if Fv is additive.
The quotient by this subgroup scheme is a finite abelian group which we denote
by G(Fv ) depending on the fibre type.
Lemma 7.3. The singular fibres of elliptic surfaces admit the following group
structure:
           multiplicative Gm × G(Fv ) : G(In ) ∼
                                               = Z/nZ
                additive Ga × G(Fv ) : G(I2m ) ∼
                                            ∗
                                                = (Z/2Z)2
                                        G(I2m+1 ) ∼
                                            ∗
                                                  = Z/4Z,
                                        G(II) = G(II∗ ) ∼
                                               ∼        = {0}
                                        G(III) ∼= G(III∗ ) ∼
                                                           = Z/2Z,
                                               ∼       ∗ ∼
                                        G(IV) = G(IV ) = Z/3Z.
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 33

7.3. Simple components vs. sections. By definition of the Néron model, the
group structures of the generic fibre and the special fibres are compatible. Here
we only consider the simple fibre components met by a section. Since the simple
components of a fibre exactly form the group G(Fv ), we derive the following
property:
                                                 Q
Lemma 7.4. Consider the map ψ : E(K) → v∈R G(Fv ), taking a section to
the respective fibre components that it meets. Then ψ is a group homomorphism.
7.4. Simple components vs. torsion sections. Cor. 7.2 indicates that a tor-
sion section P 6= O has to meet some fibre non-trivially. By this, we mean that
P intersects a non-zero component (i.e. different from the zero component) of
some fibre. Hence Lemma 7.4 specialises as follows:
Corollary 7.5. Restricted to the torsion subgroup of E(K), the group homomor-
phism ϕ is injective:
                                       ψ Y
                            E(K)tors ֒→      G(Fv ).
                                           v∈R

   The corollary is best-known in characteristic zero. A rigorous characteristic-
free proof follows from the theory of Mordell-Weil lattices, see 11.9.
Remark 7.6. If the characteristic p ≥ 0 does not divide the order of the torsion
section P , then it follows from the theory of the Néron model [59] that P̄ and Ō
are disjoint. Without the assumption, the statement is not valid as supersingular
elliptic curves in characteristic p have no p-torsion. An example for an elliptic
surface with peculiar p-torsion was given in [70, App. 2].
7.5. Narrow Mordell-Weil group. The previous result yields a bound on the
size of the torsion subgroup of E(K). In particular, the order of a torsion section
cannot exceed the least common multiple m of the annihilators of the G(Fv ).
   Generally, this tells us that upon multiplication by m on E, no section meets
the trivial lattice anymore. Hence all these multiples lie in the following subgroup
of E(K):
Definition 7.7. The narrow Mordell-Weil group E(K)0 consists of all those
sections which meet the zero component of every fibre:
          E(K)0 = ker(ψ) = {P ∈ E(K); P meets every fibre at Θ0 }.
  In terms of the narrow Mordell-Weil group, our previous observation can be
rephrased as follows:
                            mE(K) ⊆ E(K)0 .
7.6. Sections vs. automorphisms. We will gain a much better understanding
of torsion sections by the following interpretation: Given a section P ∈ E(K),
we define an automorphism tP of the underlying surface S by translation by P :
This is well-defined on the smooth fibres and can be extended to the singular
34                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

fibres. Note that translation by a section does not define an automorphism of
the elliptic surface, since the zero-section is not preserved, but of the underlying
surface where we forget the elliptic structure. However, tP respects the elliptic
fibration, i.e. f = f ◦ tP .
   Often, an elliptic fibration with an infinite section allows one to conclude that
some projective surface has infinite automorphism group. For instance, this holds
true in characteristic 6= 2, 3 for the normal form for given j-invariant by 6.13.
7.7. Quotient by torsion section. If P is a torsion section, then tP defines an
automorphism of finite order m on the underlying algebraic surface S. On the
generic fibre, tP operates fixed point free. This translates to all smooth fibres
unless p | m, cf. Remark 7.6. In any case, the quotient is an isogenous elliptic
curve E ′ over k(C). If k contains the mth roots of unity, then E ′ is endowed
with a k-rational m-torsion point which induces the dual isogeny E ′ → E. The
composition of the two isogenies is just multiplication by m if p ∤ m, resp. by
p2e m′ if m = pe m′ with p ∤ m′ .
  The Kodaira-Néron model of E ′ is another elliptic surface S ′ over C with
section. If p ∤ m, this surface is obtained from the quotient S/htP i by resolving
the ordinary double point singularities resulting from the fixed points of tP :
                                         ^
                                   S ′ = S/htP i.

Because of the isogeny E → E ′ , the elliptic surfaces S, S ′ are often also called
isogenous. Thanks to the dual isogeny, the surfaces share the same Betti numbers.
In fact, their Lefschetz numbers have to coincide as well; in consequence ρ(S) =
ρ(S ′ ) (cf. [27] for a similar result for complex K3 surfaces).
7.8. Relation between singular fibres. The quotient S/htP i is best studied
when the characteristic p does not divide m, the order of the section P , since
then the operation is separable. One can study the action of tP on the singular
fibres componentwise. This is very convenient, since each component is a rational
curve. Since the quotient has to give rise to one of Kodaira’s fibre types after the
desingularisation, one can classify the possible actions on the singular fibres.
7.8.1. Multiplicative fibres. For simplicity, let us consider only the case where
the order m of P is prime. The general case can easily be deduced from this
simplification.
  If P meets the zero component of an In fibre, then each component is fixed
by tP . Hence there are exactly n fixed points at the intersections of the com-
ponents. Each of them attains an Am−1 singularity in the quotient. Hence the
desingularisation results in a fibre of type Imn .
  If P does not meet the zero section, then m | n by Cor. 7.5. In particular, tP
rotates the singular fibre (i.e. the cycle of rational curves) by an angle of 2π/m.
Thus tP acts fixed-point free and identifies m components. The resulting fibre in
the quotient surface S ′ has type In/m .
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                   35

7.8.2. Additive fibres. If the torsion section P were to meet the zero component
of an additive fibre, then this would impose a second fixed point apart from the
node (or cusp). It is easily checked that the resolution cannot result in one of
Kodaira’s types of singular fibres (under the assumption p ∤ m). Hence P has to
meet the singular fibre non-trivially.
Lemma 7.8. Let E(K)′ denote the prime to p-torsion in E(K) where p =char(K).
Then any additive fibre Fv gives an injection
                                 E(K)′ ֒→ G(Fv ).
   The lemma is a direct consequence of Cor. 7.5, since ϕ is a group homomor-
phism. In consequence, additive fibres can easily rule out torsion (prime to p),
like fibres of type II and II∗ or combinations of other fibre types. The condition
e(S) = e(S ′ ) imposes further restrictions on the singular fibres. These restrictions
apply particularly to the possible configurations of multiplicative fibres (cf. sec-
tion 8).
7.9. Universal elliptic curves. In characteristic zero, torsion points give rise
to universal elliptic curve. Here the universal property refers to some level N > 3
as follows: Y1 (N) is an elliptic curve over some function field K over Q such that
        • E(K) ∼ = Z/NZ, and
        • conversely, any elliptic curve with a rational N-torsion point is a member
          of the family.
The assumption N > 3 guarantees that the universal elliptic curve Y1 (N) forms
a unique one-dimensional family over the modular curve X1 (N). By filling in
suitable singular fibres through the Kodaira-Néron model, we can thus interpret
Y1 (N) as an elliptic surface with N-torsion in the Mordell-Weil group. The
universal property then guarantees that any other elliptic surface with an N-
torsion section arises from Y1 (N) through a base change.
   These universal elliptic curves have important applications to arithmetic and
in particular to modular forms. Namely, one can relate all newforms of level N
and weight > 2 to (desingularisations of) the self fibre products of Y1 (N) by [16].
In this arithmetic context, it becomes important that Y1 (N) admits a model over
Z[ N1 ].
7.10. Tate’s normal form. In order to explicitly parametrise universal elliptic
curves, it is convenient to apply two normalisations. Starting from an elliptic
curve in generalised Weierstrass form (2) with section P , we first translate the
section to (0, 0). Then a6 ≡ 0, and P is two-torsion if and only if a3 ≡ 0.
Otherwise a translation of y yields a4 ≡ 0. The resulting equation is Tate’s
normal form for a cubic with a rational point P = (0, 0):
                        E : y 2 + a1 x y + a3 y = x3 + a2 x2 .
As a reconfirmation, we check −P = (0, −a3 ) 6= P , so P is not 2-torsion.
36                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

7.10.1. 3-Torsion. Since −2P = (a2 , 0), the point P has order 3 if and only if
a2 ≡ 0. But then there is still much freedom in choosing a1 , a3 – too much
freedom actually in order to have a universal elliptic curve. Moreover, there are
two principal possibilities for the j-invariant: If a1 ≡ 0, then j ≡ 0, otherwise j is
not constant. The following two curve can be regarded as minimal in some sense.
(Namely, they are extremal, cf. section 9.)
                        IV∗ , I3 , I1 : S : y 2 + xy + ty = x3
                          IV∗ , IV : S ′ : y 2 + t y = x3
Both surfaces are apparently rational since their function fields equal k(x, y). In
either case, the trivial lattice T has rank ten. Since e(S) = e(S ′ ) = 12 and
ρ = 10, we can deduce from Cor. 6.13 that the Mordell-Weil rank is zero. Since
T has discriminant −9, there can only be 3-torsion in either case:
                          E(K) = E ′ (K) = {O, P, −P }.

7.10.2. Higher torsion. If a2 6≡ 0, then we can rescale x and y in such a way that
a2 = a3 . Writing
                           b = −a2 = −a3 , c = 1 − a1 ,
we can express the coefficients of nP through b, c. For the first few multiples, we
obtain
            P = (0, 0)           2P = (b, bc)        3P = (c, b − c)
           −P = (0, b)         −2P = (b, 0)        −3P = (c, c2 )
From the coefficients, we obtain affine equations in b, c for the modular curves
parametrising elliptic curves with a torsion point.
   For instance, for 4-torsion, we obtain c = 0. The resulting elliptic surface
over the affine b-line has reducible singular fibres I4 at 0 and I∗1 at ∞.
   Similarly, 5-torsion implies b = c. In consequence, there are two fibres of type
I5 at 0 and ∞.
   Subsequently, 6-torsion is parametrised by the conic b = c + c2 while 7-
torsion yields a nodal cubic. The corresponding elliptic surface of level 7 is the
first non-rational surface – it is a K3 surface.
   The above elliptic surfaces are well-defined in any characteristic, but the fibres
degenerate in characteristics p | N. In fact, there the j-map becomes inseparable
(cf. [30, §12]).

7.11. 2-Torsion and quadratic twisting. The problems with 2-torsion are
two-fold. On the one hand, we experience the same phenomenon with different
j-invariants – constant vs. non-constant – as in the 3-torsion case. But there is
also a similar structural difference related to quadratic twisting.
   We work with fields of characteristic other than 2. Hence we can reduce to an
extended Weierstrass form (9). Here the 2-torsion points, if any, are given by the
                                  ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  37

zeroes αi of the right-hand side polynomial in x – with y-coordinate zero, since
the lines through O are exactly the vertical lines (and the line at ∞).
   Now consider the quadratic twist by some d ∈ K as in (6). It is immediate that
the resulting elliptic curve has 2-torsion points (d αi , 0). In other words, quadratic
twists preserve the 2-torsion. Thus the question for a universal elliptic curve with
a 2-torsion section or full 2-torsion in the Mordell-Weil group is ill-posed, since
we can always twist at arbitrary places.
   Note that in general, quadratic twists of elliptic surface introduce I∗0 fibres.
Hence it makes sense to ask for elliptic surface with Z/2- or (Z/2)2 -torsion sections
and the minimal number of I∗0 fibres. All these surfaces are rational by inspection
of their function fields.
   For (Z/2)2 , this leads to the so-called Legendre family on the one hand
                             S:    y 2 = x (x − 1) (x − t)
with singular fibres I2 at t = 0, 1 and I∗2 at ∞.
   On the other hand, we can fix any elliptic curve E over k. Since k is alge-
braically closed, E has full 2-torsion over k. Then consider the quadratic twist
by t. This yields an elliptic surface over P1 with coordinate t. It has two sin-
gular fibres of type I∗0 at the two places of ramification, 0 and ∞, and constant
j-invariant j = j(E). In particular, these elliptic surface form a one-dimensional
family parametrised by j.
   For a single 2-torsion section, we derive two surfaces without I∗0 fibres:
                         S : y 2 = x3 + x2 + tx III∗ , I2 , I1
                         S′ :   y 2 = x3 + t x  III∗ , III
Both admit the section (0, 0). As before, one finds that E(K) = E ′ (K) =
{O, (0, 0)}. Note that E ′ has j-invariant j = 123 . As for S, we can still twist the
generic fibre quadratically at two of the singular places without introducing any
I∗0 fibres.

7.12. We take this opportunity to note that with respect to non-2-torsion, qua-
dratic twisting has exactly the opposite effect: no sections are preserved. This is
related to quadratic base change as follows:
   Let S → C be an elliptic surface and C ′ → C a double cover with set of
ramification points S. Then the Mordell-Weil group of the base change S ′ is
generated (up to finite index, a 2-power) by the independent Mordell-Weil groups
of S and its quadratic twist Ŝ over S:
                 2E(k(C ′ )) ֒→ E(k(C)) ⊕ Ê(k(C)) ֒→ E(k(C ′ )).
This decomposition holds true up to two-torsion because the two given Mordell-
Weil groups correspond exactly to the invariant and anti-invariant sections under
the deck transformation.
38                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

7.13. Elliptic modular surfaces. Over C there is direct construction of the
elliptic surfaces associated to the universal elliptic curves. This was introduced
by the second author in [91].
   In brief, let Γ ⊂ SL2 (Z) denote a subgroup of finite index. If −1 6∈ Γ, then
one can associate a complex elliptic surface S(Γ) to Γ in a canonical way. For the
congruence subgroups Γ1 (N), we recover the elliptic surface associated to Y1 (N).
   The common theme is a generalisation of the relation with modular forms of
weight 3. Namely, there is an intrinsic isomorphism
                                H 2,0 (S(Γ)) ∼
                                             = S3 (Γ)
between holomorphic 2-forms on S(Γ) and cusp forms of weight 3 for Γ. However,
if Γ is not a congruence subgroup, then there is no general way to translate
this isomorphism into arithmetic properties, say using the L-function of S(Γ)
over some number field. Instead, there are conjectural Atkin–Swinnerton-Dyer
congruence relations, but these have only been proven in very special cases so
far.
   We remark that this construction was generalised by M. Nori in [65] to gen-
eralised modular elliptic surfaces. Over C these have always finite Mordell-Weil
group, thus yielding most extremal elliptic surfaces (see 9.2).

                        8. Rational elliptic surfaces
   This section initiates our study of rational elliptic surfaces. The previous sec-
tions allow us to develop a fairly precise picture. Another aspect will be added
by the introduction of Mordell-Weil lattices, see section 11.
                                   f
8.1. Lüroth’s theorem. Let S −→ C be an elliptic surface over k. The fibration
induces an inclusion of function fields
                                   k(C) ⊆ k(S).
If S is rational, Lüroth’s theorem implies that C ∼= P1 . Thus any rational elliptic
surface is fibred over the projective line. Alternatively, we could have argued
with Thm. 6.12. Before we continue the investigation of rational elliptic surfaces,
we derive a general fact for elliptic surfaces over P1 .

8.2. Elliptic surfaces over the projective line cont’d. As a consequence of
the Tate algorithm, we have seen in 4.10 that every elliptic surface with a section
over P1 has a globally minimal generalised Weierstrass form (2). Equivalently,
there is n ∈ N such that
     • deg(ai ) ≤ ni for all i, but
     • there is some i such that deg(ai ) ≥ (n − 1)i (minimality at ∞) and
     • for any finite place on P1 with valuation v, there is some i such that
        v(ai ) < i (minimality at finite places).
                                 ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                    39

Since the indices refer to some weight, the discriminant of a globally minimal
elliptic surface S has degree
                                    deg(∆) = 12n.
On the other hand, we have at any place

                                  v(∆) = e(Fv ) + δv

by definition of the wild ramification in 4.6. Hence Thm. 6.10 gives

                              deg(∆) = e(S) = 12χ(S).

Thus we deduce the factor n of the weights of the coefficients ai of the generalised
Weierstrass form:
                                      n = χ(S).

8.3. Canonical bundle. For an elliptic surface S with section over P1 , the
canonical bundle formula in 6.6 returns

                                 KS = (χ(S) − 2) F

in NS(S). A rational surface has KS anti-ample. Recall that χ(S) > 0 since we
assumed the existence of a singular fibre. Hence any rational elliptic surface has

                               χ(S) = 1, e(S) = 12.

8.4. Normal form of a rational elliptic surface. Combining 8.2 and 8.3, we
deduce that a rational elliptic surface S with section is given by a generalised
Weierstrass form (2)

                 S:    y 2 + a1 x y + a3 y = x3 + a2 x2 + a4 x + a6 .

with deg(ai ) ≤ i. Conversely, such a generalised Weierstrass form defines a
rational elliptic surface if and only if it has a singular fibre. That is, no admissible
transformation makes each ai into an ith power. In particular, this holds if the
discriminant ∆ is not a twelfth power.
   The last characterisation is an equivalence if char(k) 6= 2, 3 because then there
is no wild ramification. Since there would be only one singular fibre F∞ , we would
have deg(∆) = e(F∞ ). Hence F∞ would have at least 11 components. But then
the trivial lattice would have rank(T ) ≥ 12 > ρ(S) = 10, contradiction.
   In characteristics 2, 3, however, there are (rational) elliptic surfaces with ex-
actly one singular fibre. Hence it is necessary to check the minimality at the
twelve-fold zero of ∆.
40                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

8.5. Cubic pencils. Our first examples for (rational) elliptic surfaces were cubic
pencils. This characterisation is in fact complete:
Proposition 8.1 ([15, Thm. 5.6.1]). Any rational elliptic surface S is isomorphic
to the blow-up of P2 in the base points of a cubic pencil.
   The proof is based on the consequence of the adjuction formula that any smooth
rational curve D on S has self-intersection D 2 ≥ −2. Blowing down (−1)-curves
successively to a minimal model X (in the sense of algebraic surfaces), one can
show that S also admits a morphism π to P2 . But then π(KS ) = KP2 ∼ −3H
for a hyperplane section H. Since F = −KS , the images of the fibres are plane
cubic curves and generally smooth. (“The pencil descends from S to P2 .”)

8.6. Frame. Even lattices have been classified to great extent. Here we investi-
gate whether NS(S) is even for an elliptic surface – or whether it admits mean-
ingful even sublattices.
  Recall the trivial lattice T as a sublattice of NS(S). This lattice may vary
greatly with the elliptic surface, but it always contains the rank two lattice gen-
erated by zero section and general fibre:
                                                    
                                               −χ 1
                              T ⊇ hŌ, F i =
                                                1 0

Note that this sublattice L is even, i.e. D 2 ∈ 2Z for all D ∈ L, if and only if
χ(S) is even:
                                  
                               h1i ⊕ h−1i,!      if χ(S) is odd;
                         −χ 1 ∼
            hŌ, F i =          =          0 1
                          1 0     U = 1 0 , if χ(S) is even.
                                  

The even lattice U is often called the hyperbolic plane. Thus NS(S) may not
be even for an elliptic surface. However, NS(S) always contains an even sublattice
of corank two: the frame
                            W (S) = hŌ, F i⊥ ⊂ NS(S).
Lemma 8.2. For any elliptic surface S with section, the frame W (S) is a
negative-definite even lattice of rank ρ(S) − 2.
Proof. By the algebraic index theorem, NS(S) has signature (1, ρ(S) − 1). But
hŌ, F i is visibly indefinite, so its orthogonal complement has signature (0, ρ(S) −
2).
   Letting D ∈ hŌ, F i⊥ , we have D.F = D.KS = 0. The adjunction formula
yields D 2 = 2g(D) − 2.                                                             
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                41

8.7. Let ϕ denote the orthogonal projection in NS(S) with respect to U
                               ϕ : NS(S) → W (S).
Then the image of a section P under ϕ is
                        ϕ(P̄ ) = P̄ − Ō − (χ(S) + P̄ .Ō) F.
In particular this element has self-intersection
(18)                     ϕ(P̄ )2 = −(2 χ(S) + 2P̄ .Ō).
This orthogonal projection should be compared to the definition of the Mordell-
Weil lattices in 11.3; the latter will be based on the orthogonal projection with
respect to T (S) in NS(S) ⊗ Q.
   As soon as χ(S) > 1, the relation (18) allows us to recover (the root lattices
of) the singular fibres from the root lattice of the frame:
                 W (S)root = {x ∈ W (S); x2 = −2}
                                     P
Lemma 8.3. Assume that χ(S) > 1. Then v∈R Tv = W (S)root .
   In particular this shows that if χ(S) > 1, then the trivial lattice can be com-
puted as
                              T (S) = U ⊕ W (S)root.
On a rational elliptic surface (i.e. χ(S) = 1), the frame behaves completely dif-
ferently as we will see in the next section.
8.8. Néron-Severi lattice of a rational elliptic surface. Since a rational
elliptic surface S is isomorphic to P2 blown up in nine points, NS(S) has rank
ten and discriminant −1. The latter property is called unimodular. Inside
NS(S), we have the indefinite lattice generated by zero section and general fibre
and its orthogonal complement, the frame W (S) = hŌ, F i⊥ . By definition, both
sublattices are unimodular. Moreover, W (S) is even and negative definite by
Lemma 8.2. It follows from lattice theory that there is only one such lattice up
to isometry. This lattice corresponds to the Dynkin diagram E8 . Hence there is
an isomorphism
                             W (S) = hŌ, F i⊥ ∼
                                               = E8 .
We point out the special case where Ō and F already generate the trivial lattice:
Corollary 8.4. Let S be a rational elliptic surface without reducible fibres. Then
the orthogonal projection in NS(S) with respect to Ō, F induces an isomorphism
                                  E(K) ∼ = E8
  For a general cubic pencil, the corollary tells us that the nine (disctinct) base
points induce eight independent sections after choosing one of them as the zero
section.
  In the general situation where all fibres are irreducible, one can thus endow
E(K) with a lattice structure. Up to torsion, this approach can be pursued in
42                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

full generality, leading to the notion of Mordell-Weil lattices which we introduce
in section 11.

                 9. Extremal rational elliptic surfaces
  Before continuing our investigation of rational elliptic surfaces, we turn to an
important special class among these surfaces in detail – extremal elliptic surfaces.
Their relevance lies in several different aspects such as classification questions and
arithmetic properties.
9.1. Maximal Picard number. We first introduce a more general notion that
governs extremality of elliptic surfaces. Recall the bounds for the Picard number
by Lefschetz and Igusa from 6.11
                      ρ(S) ≤ h1,1 (S)   resp.    ρ(S) ≤ b2 (S).
If the respective bound is attained, we refer to the Picard number as maximal.
For elliptic surfaces, one can see that both bounds are attained infinitely often by
(purely inseprable in characteristic p) base change from rational elliptic surfaces.
For rational elliptic surfaces, both bounds coincide and are always attained.
9.2. Extremal elliptic surfaces. Elliptic surfaces with maximal Picard number
can be distinguished according to the contribution from the Mordell-Weil group.
A special case occurs when the trivial lattice generates the Néron-Severi lattice
up to finite index.
Definition 9.1. An elliptic surface S with section is called extremal if ρ(S) is
maximal and E(K) is finite.
   One should think of extremal elliptic surfaces as very isolated and rare. Over
the complex numbers, this holds with the exception of a few isotrivial families
(cf. 9.8), but generally speaking there are quite a few examples. In postive char-
acteristic, however, it follows from Thm. 5.2 that essentially all extremal elliptic
surfaces arise through inseparable base change.
   By Thm. 6.3, the index of the trivial lattice T (S) inside NS(S) is exactly the
size of the Mordell-Weil group of the extremal elliptic surface S:
(19)                 disc(T (S)) = (#E(K))2 disc(NS(S)).
  Often extremal elliptic surfaces are related to subgroups of SL2 (Z). We have
seen instances of this in Section 7, see in particular 7.13.
9.3. Extremal rational elliptic surfaces. A rational elliptic surface S has
unimodular Néron-Severi group. If S is extremal, (19) thus simplifies as
                             disc(T (S)) = −(#E(K))2
Since the discriminants of the full trivial lattice T (S) and the sublattice of the
frame W (S) which is the orthogonal complement of the unimodular sublattice
                                       ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                         43

generated by Ō, F agree up to sign, we obtain the following information about
the singular fibres:
                         Y
(20)                        disc(Tv ) = (#E(K))2 .
                               v∈R

Here we employ the convention that the irreducible fibres have discriminant 1.
  On the other hand, we can compare the Euler number from Thm. 6.10
                                     X
                        12 = e(S) =      (e(Fv ) + δv )
                                                    v

against the rank of the trivial lattice from Prop. 6.6:
                                               X
                      10 = rank(T (S)) = 2 +       (mv − 1).
                                                              v

Subtracting yields:
                        
                      X 0,                     if Fv is smooth;
                        
(21)               4=     1,                    if Fv is multiplicative;
                        
                      v 2 + δ ,
                              v                 if Fv is additive.
In particular, we deduce that there are at most four singular fibres. If there is no
wild ramification (e.g. if char(k) 6= 2, 3), there are in fact exactly three cases:
    (1) 4 multiplicative singular fibres;
    (2) 2 multiplicative and 1 additive singular fibres;
    (3) 2 additive singular fibres.
For either case, we have seen examples in 7.10.1 – 7.11. In the presence of
wild ramification, all combinations of fewer singular fibres (involving at least one
additive fibre) occur as well.

9.4. Classification. One classifies extremal rational elliptic surfaces in terms of
the configurations of singular fibres which we write as tuples
           [n1 , n2 , . . .] with entries 1, 2, . . . , 0∗ , 1∗ , . . . , II, III, . . . , II∗
representing the fibre types.

9.4.1. Existence. Relation (21) yields a finite list of possible configurations of
singular fibres. One can rule out many of these configurations already by (20).
Additionally we only need the injection from Lemma 7.8. To prove the existence
of the remaining configurations, one has to find explicit equations. This can be
accomplished with Weierstrass equations and base change [54]. It seems that the
first semi-stable example was exhibited by the Hesse pencil in [91], realising the
elliptic modular surface for Γ(3). The first complete list of semi-stable surfaces
is due to Beauville using cubic pencils [6]. (For the close connection between
extremal elliptic surfaces and the abc-conjecture, see 12.14 and [100].)
44                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

9.4.2. Mordell-Weil group. In each case, the configuration determines the Mordell-
Weil group. One can use quotients by (translation by) the torsion sections to limit
the possible orders. It turns out that there is always only one abelian group of
order given by the singular fibres respecting these bounds. (This is not valid in
general; for instance, it fails for extremal elliptic K3 surfaces – and so does the
uniqueness.)
9.4.3. Uniqueness. To prove uniqueness, one can often argue with universal el-
liptic curves. Here we obviously have to exclude the one-dimensional family with
configuration [0∗ , 0∗ ]. A helpful fact is also that the quotient by a torsion section
is an isogenous surface with a section of the same order. On the other hand, upon
deriving explicit Weierstrass equations, uniqueness up to Möbius transformations
and admissible transformation of x and y is always more or less immediate.
Theorem 9.2 (Miranda–Persson [54]). For any possible configuration except for
[0∗ , 0∗ ], there exists a unique extremal rational elliptic surface with pre-determined
Mordell-Weil group.
   In the sequel, we give the possible configurations without wild ramification and
elaborate on a few of the details of the proof of the theorem. The classification in
characteristic 2 or 3 involving wild ramification has been established by W. Lang
in [46], [47], but unfortunately there are some typos in the equations, so the
interested reader is advised to compare with [28] for instance.
9.5. Case (1). In the multiplicative case, the criterion in (20) suffices to rule out
all non-existing configurations. The next table lists the existing configurations.
We also give the Mordell-Weil group and describe the degeneration of the singular
fibres in special characteristics (cf. 7.10.2).

                configuration       MW      char(k) degeneration
                  [1, 1, 1, 9]      Z/3       6= 3        [II, 9]
                  [1, 1, 2, 8]      Z/4         6= ( 2   [III, 8]
                                                     2 [2, IV, 6]
                  [1, 2, 3, 6]      Z/6    6=
                                                     3 [III,  3, 6]
                  [1, 1, 5, 5]      Z/5           6= 5  [II, 5, 5]
                  [2, 2, 4, 4]   Z/4 × Z/2     6= 2        −−
                                        2
                  [3, 3, 3, 3]    (Z/3)          6= 3      −−
9.6. Case (2). In the mixed case of additive and multiplicative fibres, Lemma 7.8
becomes important. For instance, that lemma directly shows that the exceptional
entries in the previous table are impossible outside the given characteristic. Hence
we shall not reproduce them in the following list. For shortness, it only includes
those configuration that exist in characteristic zero. By reduction, the same holds
outside chararacteristics 2, 3. In the remaining characteristics, the existence of
wild ramification complicates the classification.
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                   45


                 configuration MW            configuration MW
                    [1, 1, II∗ ] {0}           [1, 1, 4∗]   Z/2
                   [1, 2, III∗ ] Z/2           [1, 4, 1∗]   Z/4
                   [1, 3, IV∗ ]  Z/3                   ∗
                                               [2, 2, 2 ]  (Z/2)2
9.7. Case (3). The additive configurations are treated exactly along the same
lines. Outside characteristics 2, 3, we obtain

                 configuration MW            configuration MW
                    [II, II∗ ]  {0}            [IV, IV∗ ]   Z/3
                   [III, III∗ ] Z/2             [0∗ , 0∗ ] (Z/2)2
9.8. Isotrivial elliptic surfaces. All the rational elliptic surfaces in case (3)
have constant j-invariant. Such fibrations are called isotrivial. The name has its
origin in the property that after a suitable finite base change, the surface becomes
isomorphic to a product of the new base curve and the (constant) general fibre.
   Among elliptic fibrations, the isotrivial ones play a special role. We have seen
in the discussion of universal elliptic curves that isotrivial fibrations can come in
families even if it is unexpected.
   In characteristic zero, extremal elliptic surfaces over P1 are known to have
discrete moduli unless e ≤ 60. The proof combines the infinitesimal Torelli
theorem for elliptic surfaces with non-constant j-invariant by M.-H. Saitō [75]
with the classification of all extremal elliptic surfaces with constant j-invariant by
Kloosterman [32]. The exceptional Euler numbers are due to families of isotrivial
elliptic surfaces with j-invariant 0 or 123 .

                      10. Semi-stable elliptic surfaces
   We have classified all extremal rational elliptic surfaces in terms of the possible
configurations of singular fibres. Now we would like to know all possible config-
urations in general. Letting go the condition extremal, there will clearly be no
uniqueness anymore.
   We will develop part of the theory in greater generality. For simplicity, we
shall only consider semi-stable elliptic surfaces (i.e. without additive fibres). In
case of additive fibres, the arguments have to be modified slightly. Moreover,
we will restrict ourselves to the ground field k = C. This will enable us to use
monodromy arguments and deformations. In positive characteristic, there are
further issues with inseparable base change and wild ramification that need to be
addressed, but the results do not differ essentially.
   We note that the first investigation of this kind seems to be due to U. Schmickler-
Hirezebruch who classified elliptic surfaces over P1 with section and at most three
singular fibres [77]. Such a configuration forces some fibre to be additive, so these
elliptic surfaces will not appear in this section as we restrict to the semi-stable
case.
46                       MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

10.1. J-map of a semi-stable elliptic surface. For a semi-stable elliptic sur-
face S over C, the j-map
                                            j : C → P1
is a morphism of degree e(S) = 12χ(S). By definition, j is branched above 0 and
123 with ramification orders divisible by 3 and 2, respectively. For simplicity, we
will often apply a normalisation so that the third ramification point is 1 instead
of 123 . According to 5.2 this guarantees that in the pull-back of the normal form
surface via j, the additive fibres II and III∗ are replaced by 4χ resp. 6χ fibres
of type I∗0 . Then these can be eliminated by quadratic twisting to recover the
semi-stable fibration S → C. Instead of the fibre I1 at ∞, S acquires semi-stable
fibres of types [n1 , . . . , ns ] where the ni denote the ramification indices at ∞.
   If C = P1 , then we can phrase this through the following factorisation of the
discriminant:
                             Ys
                   ∆=             (t − αi )ni with pairwise distinct αi .
                           i=1

10.2. Monodromy representation. Let π : P1 → P1 be a map of degree n
with ramification points 0, 1, ∞ (possibly among others). It is a general fact that
any such π is determined by its monodromy representation
                                    (σ0 , σ1 , σ∞ , τ1 , . . . , τr ).
Here σi , τj ∈ Sn encode the monodromy around the branch points such that
     • σ0 ◦ σ1 ◦ σ∞ ◦ τ1 ◦ · · · ◦ τr = id, and
     • the σi , τj generate a transitive subgroup of Sn .
  In the case of a semi-stable elliptic surface over P1 with arithmetic genus χ, we
can specify the σi as follows:
     • σ0 is the product of 4χ 3-cycles,
     • σ1 is the product of 6χ 2-cycles, and
     • σ∞ is the product of s cycles γi of lengths ni .
10.3. Deformation of j-map. In the sequel, we shall say that a tuple [n1 , . . . , ns ]
exists if there is an elliptic surface over P1 with exactly this configuration of sin-
gular fibres. Over C, we have the following deformation argument at hand:
Lemma 10.1. Let [n1 , . . . , ns ] exist. Let i ≤ s and a, b ≥ 1 such that a + b = ni .
Then [n1 , . . . , ni−1 , a, b, ni+1 . . . , ns ] exists.
     Assume that [n1 , . . . , ns ] exists. The proof of the lemma builds on the fact that
                      ((1, . . . , a) (a + 1, . . . , n)) (a, n) = (1, . . . , n).
Hence we can write the ni -cycle γi as the product of two disjoint cycles γ ′ , γ ′′ of
lengths a resp. b times a 2-cycle exchanging the “end points” of γ ′ and γ ′′ . This
extra 2-cycle accounts for an additional branch point.
                                     ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                        47

   It is easily checked that the resulting monodromy representation has product
equalling the identity and generates a transitive group. By 10.2 there is a map
j : P1 → P1 with the claimed ramification indices at ∞.

10.4. Semi-stable rational elliptic surfaces. Lemma 10.1 is very useful to
prove the existence of elliptic surfaces with given configuration of singular fibres.
Starting with the six semi-stable extremal rational elliptic surfaces, we obtain
through the deformation lemma:
Corollary 10.2. For rational elliptic surfaces, the following 5-tuples exist
       [1, 1, 1, 1, 8], [1, 1, 1, 2, 7], [1, 1, 1, 3, 6], [1, 1, 2, 2, 6], [1, 1, 1, 4, 5],
       [1, 1, 2, 3, 5], [1, 1, 2, 4, 4], [1, 2, 2, 3, 4], [2, 2, 2, 2, 4], [1, 2, 3, 3, 3].
  Note that the tuple need not determine the torsion subgroup of the Mordell-
Weil group. For instance, the first 5-tuple is realised by two different one-
dimensional families: one has no torsion sections, while the other family arises
through quadratic base change from the extremal rational elliptic surface with
configuration [1, 1, 4∗]. In particular, it admits a 2-torsion section.
                                                                 P
Corollary 10.3. Every s-tuple [n1 , . . . , ns ] with s ≥ 6 and     ni = 12 exists on
a rational elliptic surface.
10.5. It should be emphasised that the deformation construction is not algebraic
in nature. Hence it does not provide any information about fields of definition
or characteristic p. For the extremal elliptic surfaces, it is immediately clear that
they are defined over some number fields. Compare Belyi’s theorem which is
actually the converse of a characterisation of algebraic curves over Q̄ due to Weil.

10.6. Families. It follows from the deformation argument that semi-stable ra-
tional elliptic surfaces with s singular fibres occur in (s − 4)-dimensional families.
This statement does not generalise directly to elliptic surfaces with additive fi-
bres, but it can be modified to work there as well as for arbitrary semi-stable
elliptic surfaces.
   In consequence, rational elliptic surfaces with only I1 fibres have 8 moduli.
This expected number agrees with the heuristic based on the Weierstrass from
(3): the coefficients a4 , a6 have 5 + 7 = 12 coefficients. We have to subtract four
degrees of freedom for applying Möbius transformations and rescaling x, y by an
admissible transformation (5).

10.7. The remaining 5-tuples. There are three 5-tuples of natural numbers
adding up to 12 (thus possibly realised by rational elliptic surfaces) that are not
covered by Cor. 10.2. We claim that they are missing for a good reason:
Proposition 10.4. The 5-tuples [1, 2, 2, 2, 5], [1, 1, 3, 3, 4], [2, 2, 2, 3, 3] do not ex-
ist.
48                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

   The proof of the non-existence goes like this: First we prove that the above
configurations do not allow torsion in the Mordell-Weil group. To see this, con-
sider the quotient by translation by a hypothetical torsion section. By 7.7, this
results in an isogenous rational elliptic surface S ′ . In particular, we obtain in the
analogous notation (with R = R′ )
                                             X
                              12 = e(S ′ ) =     e(Fv′ ).
                                             v∈R

But in the present situation, one easily checks that any torsion section would
meet some fibres in the zero component. On the quotient surface, these fibres of
type In result in “bigger” fibres Inp – causing e(S ′ ) to exceed 12.
   Since the Picard number is ten and the trivial lattice has rank nine, it follows
from Thm. 6.3 that
                  E(K) = {P }      and    NS(S) = hP̄ , Ō, F, Θv,i i.
Here we have not used yet that NS(S) is unimodular. One could proceed with
a case-by-case analysis, going though (enough of) the possible intersection be-
haviours of P with O and the singular fibres to conclude (by computing the
intersection matrices) that it is an impossible task to set up P in such a way
that NS(S) has discriminant −1. However, this would be quite a lengthy and
detailed undertaking. Instead, we turn to the theory of Mordell-Weil lattices
which endows the Mordell-Weil group (up to torsion) with a lattice structure.
This will enable us to read off the answer directly. In [70] Oguiso and Shioda
proved more generally that no rational elliptic surface admits the corresponding
trivial lattices.
   Yet another line of proof would involve the discriminant group, but we will
only introduce this technique in the context of K3 surfaces where it becomes
indispensable.

                          11. Mordell-Weil lattice
  In this section we finally introduce the notion of Mordell-Weil lattices. It
goes back independently to Elkies [18] and one of us [93]. In practice, the idea of
Mordell-Weil lattices makes the relations between the Néron-Severi group and the
Mordell-Weil group from Section 6 much more explicit. As a major advantage,
the extent of this theory is very feasible to actual computations.
  There are many important consequences to be noted. First we can complete
the discussion of rational elliptic surfaces and classify their Mordell-Weil lattices
completely (following [70]). We will also point out the functorial behaviour of
Mordell-Weil lattices such as for base change and under Galois action.
11.1. Essential lattice. We aim at endowing the Mordell-Weil group (up to
torsion) with the structure of a positive-definite lattice. Recall that the sections
are in some sense complimentary to the trivial lattice T (S) by Thm. 6.3. Thus
                                 ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                   49

the relevant part of NS(S) sits inside the orthogonal complement of T (S). This
is how we define the essential lattice:

                              L(S) = T (S)⊥ ⊂ NS(S).

Since L(S) is included in the frame of S by definition, we obtain

Lemma 11.1.
          P The essential lattice L(S) is even and negative definite of rank
ρ(S) − 2 − v (mv − 1).

  By lattice theory, we can compute the discriminant of the essential lattice as

                               disc(NS(S))
             |disc(L(S))| =                 [NS(S) : (L(S) ⊕ T (S))]2 .
                                disc(T (S))

Hence it is not necessarily true that L(S)⊕T (S) = NS(S) (although this will hold
true if T (S) is unimodular, e.g. if there are no reducible fibres). Thus it is unclear
a priori whether there is a non-trivial group homomorphism E(K) → L(S).

11.2. To circumvent subtleties of finite index embeddings as sketched above, we
shall now tensor all lattices in consideration with Q. Generally we shall abreviate
this by a subscript Q:

                   NS(S)Q = NS(S) ⊗Z Q, T (S)Q , L(S)Q , . . . .

Tensoring makes the lattices into Q vector spaces – which does not do any harm
since NS(S) is torsion-free by Thm. 6.2. Note that the subgroup of torsion sec-
tions embeds into T (S)Q by Lemma 7.1.

11.3. Define the vector space homomorphism

                               ϕ : NS(S)Q → L(S)Q

as the orthogonal projection with respect to the sub-vector space T (S)Q . (Com-
pare the analogous construction involving U and the frame W (S) in 8.7.) For
an element D ∈ NS(S), the image ϕ(D) is uniquely determined by the universal
properties
                    ϕ(D) ⊥ T (S)Q,     ϕ(D) ≡ D      mod T (S)Q .

Lemma 11.2. The orthogonal projection ϕ gives the unique map E(K) → L(S)Q
with the above properties.

  The uniqueness follows from the universal property since (upon tensoring E(K)
by Q) it identifies two vectorspaces of the same dimension.
50                     MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

11.4. We can describe the map ϕ explicitly. For this purpose, we let Av denote
the intersection matrix of the non-zero components of the (reducible) fibre Fv at
v ∈ C:
                             Av = (Θv,i , Θv,j )1≤i,j≤mv −1 .
Then a section P ∈ E(K) is mapped to
                                                                               P̄ .Θv,1
                                                                                        

  ϕ(P ) = P̄ − Ō − (P̄ .Ō + χ(S)) F −
                                         X
                                             (Θv,1 , . . . , Θv,mv −1 )A−1         ..
                                                                        v
                                                                                   .    
                                           v                                P̄ .Θv,mv −1
Obviously ϕ(P ) ≡ P̄ mod T (S)Q . Therefore the precise shape of ϕ(P ) is verified
by checking that ϕ sits in the orthogonal complement of T (S)Q .
   The inverse matrix A−1
                        v is in general not integral, but the coefficients are made
integral by multiplying with disc(Tv ). This shows that in general the definition
of ϕ requires tensoring with Q unless there are no reducible fibres. Since the
narrow Mordell-Weil group E(K)0 does not meet any non-zero fibre components
by definition, we deduce that its image under ϕ is in fact integral:
Corollary 11.3. The orthogonal projection ϕ defines an embedding E(K)0 ֒→
L(S).
11.5. We now consider the full Mordell-Weil group. The following statement
can easily be derived from the universal property of the orthogonal projection
and from Abel’s theorem:
Proposition 11.4. The map ϕ : E(K) → L(S)Q is a group homomorphism
with kernel ker(ϕ) = E(K)tor .
                                  Q
  We have seen in 7.5 that for m = v disc(Tv )
                                  mE(K) ⊆ E(K)0 .
Hence the image of E(K) under ϕ lies in fact in m1 L(S), and we obtain an
embedding
                                         1
                       E(K)/E(K)tor ֒→ L(S).
                                         m
11.6. Height pairing. Using the orthogonal projection ϕ, we define a pairing
on E(K), the so-called height pairing:
                    P, Q ∈ E(K) ⇒ < P, Q >= −ϕ(P ).ϕ(Q).
Theorem 11.5. The height pairing is a symmetric bilinear pairing on E(K). It
induces the structure of a positive-definite lattice on E(K)/E(K)tor .
   Symmetry and bilinearity are clear. The rest follows from the fact that L(S)
is negative-definite, since
                  < P, P >= 0 ⇔ ϕ(P ) = 0 ⇔ P ∈ E(K)tor .
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  51

11.7. Mordell-Weil lattice. We call the positive-definite lattice E(K)/E(K)tor
with height pairing < ·, · > the Mordell-Weil lattice of the elliptic surface S.
For ease of notation, we shall also denote the Mordell-Weil lattice by MWL(S)
(where we suppress the elliptic fibration S → C).
  Note that the Mordell-Weil lattice will in general not be integral, but take
values in Q (or sufficiently m1 Z for the integer m from 7.5). In contrast, the
narrow Mordell-Weil lattice MWL(S)0 is indeed always integral and even.

11.8. Explicit formula. We shall now derive an explicit formula for the height
pairing of two sections P, Q ∈ E(K). Upon specialising to P = Q, we also obtain
an expression for the height h(P ) of a section P :
                                                            X
                 < P, Q >= χ(S) + P̄ .Ō + Q̄.Ō − P̄ .Q̄ −   contrv (P, Q)
                                                               v
                                                X
      h(P ) = < P, P >= 2χ(S) + 2P̄ .Ō −            contrv (P ).
                                                 v

Here the correction terms contrv (P, Q) only depend on the fibre components of
Fv met. Specifically, let P meet Θv,i and Q meet Θv,j (with the convention that
O intersects Θv,0 as usual). Then the local correction term at v is given by
                                     (
                                      0,            if ij = 0
                     contrv (P, Q) =      −1
                                      −(Av )i,j , if ij 6= 0.
The correction term for a single section P is defined by contrv (P ) =contrv (P, P ).
The inverse matrices A−1  v can be calculated in generality. We give their relevant
entries (i.e. those corresponding to the simple components) in the following table.
This also verifies that the correction terms are always positive. Throughout we
employ the following conventions:
      • 0 < i ≤ j after exchanging P and Q if necessary;
      • The components of an In fibre (n > 1) are numbered cyclically according
        to their intersection behaviour Θ0 , Θ1 , . . . , Θn−1 ;
      • At the additive fibres, we only number the simple components;
      • The simple components of an I∗n fibre for n > 0 are distinguished into the
        near component Θ1 which intersects the same double component as the
        zero component, and the far components Θ2 , Θ3 .
   As claimed, we notice that the correction terms are always positive and become
integral upon multiplication with the number of simple components of the fibre.

11.9. First application: proof of Corollary 7.5. With the above explicit
formulas, it is easy to prove Corollary 7.5. Let P, Q be torsion sections that meet
every (singular) fibre at the same component. In consequence
                   contrv (P ) = contrv (Q) = contrv (P, Q) ∀ v.
52                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA


         fibre       IV∗     III∗    In (n > 1), III, IV            I∗n
       Dynkin
                      E6     E7             An−1                  Dn+4
       diagram                                             (
                                                             1,        i=1
        i=j          4/3     3/2         i(n − i)/n
                                                             1 + n/4, i = 2, 3
                                                           (
                                                             1/2,       i=1
        i<j          2/3      −          i(n − j)/n
                                                             1/2 + n/4, i = 2
                 Table 4. Correction terms for the height pairing



Thus the torsion conditions h(P ) = h(Q) = hP, Qi = 0 imply

               2χ + 2P̄ .Ō = 2χ + 2Q̄.Ō = χ + P̄ .Ō + Q̄.Ō − P̄ .Q̄.

Whence P̄ .Ō = Q̄.Ō and P̄ .Q̄ = −χ. As χ > 0 by Corollary 6.11 and P̄ , Q̄ are
irreducible curves on S, we deduce P̄ = Q̄, i.e. P = Q.

11.10. Since the Mordell-Weil lattice is defined via the orthogonal projection in
NS(S)Q with respect to T (S)Q , we can compute the discriminant of NS(S) as
follows:

(22)    disc(NS(S)) = (−1)rankE(K)disc(T (S)) · disc(MWL(S))/(#E(K)tor )2 .

We can apply this relation to give a simple proof of Prop. 10.4.
  Recall that for those 5-tuples, the trivial lattice would have rank 9, so E(K)
would have rank 1. Moreover, the configuration of singular fibres ruled out torsion
sections. Hence E(K) would be generated by a single section P . The above
equality simplifies as

(23)                  disc(NS(S)) = −disc(T (S)) · h(P ).

But then the denominator of the correction term contrv (P ) does not suffice to
produce an equality in (22): NS(S) is unimodular, but there are too many fibres
with number of components divisible by 2 or 3. These fibres cause T (S) to have
highly divisible discriminant; hence, by inspection of the corresponding correction
terms, the denominator of the height h(P ) cannot possibly be big enough to yield
discriminant −1 in (23).

11.11. Conversely, the above argument shows how a fibre configuration can force
the existence of a section. We illustrate this by considering the first few 5-tuples
from Cor. 10.2.
                                  ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                     53

11.11.1. [1,1,1,1,8]. In this case, there are actually two possibilities:
     • E(K) torsion-free with generator P disjoint from O, but meeting Θ3 of
       the I8 fibre: h(P ) = 2 − 3 · 5/8 = 1/8.
     • E(K) with 2-torsion and a section P meeting Θ2 , but not O: h(P ) =
       2 − 2 · 6/8 = 1/2. In this case, the 2-isogenous rational elliptic surface has
       configuration [2,2,2,2,4].

11.11.2. [1,1,1,2,7]. The configuration rules out torsion sections, so E(K) is gen-
erated by a single section P , disjoint from O and intersecting the singular fibres
I2 at Θ1 and I7 at Θ2 : h(P ) = 2 − 1/2 − 10/7 = 1/14.

11.11.3. [1,1,1,3,6]. Since any section P has height P ∈ 61 Z, NS(S) can only be
unimodular if there is a 3-torsion section.

11.11.4. [1,1,2,2,6]. Again any section P has height h(P ) ∈ 16 Z. Hence there has
to be a 2-torsion section.

11.11.5. [1,1,2,4,4]. With this configuration, any section has height h(P ) ∈ 41 Z.
Hence unimodularity requires 4 | #E(K)tor by (22). However, there cannot be
full 2-torsion in E(K) since then there would be a 2-torsion section meeting an
I4 fibre in the zero component. Hence the quotient by the translation would
have singular fibres I2 , I2 , I8 (from I1 , I1 , I4 ) plus two more, resulting in an Euler
number exceeding 12. We deduce Z/4Z ⊂ E(K).
   With the given tools, we can classify the Mordell-Weil lattices of all rational
elliptic surfaces of Mordell-Weil rank zero or one, since they have at most one non-
torsion generator. The full classification was established by the second author
jointly with Oguiso in [70] – we will briefly comment on the essential ingredients
in the next few subsections.
   For general elliptic surfaces, we can also employ the above techniques. But then
we have also to take the transcendental part of H 2 into account, since NS(S) will
in general not span H 2 . For the K3 case, see the discussion in 12.9, 12.10.

11.12. We can relate the Mordell-Weil lattice MWL(S) and the essential lattice
L(S) more closely. For this purpose, we change the sign of the intersection form
on L(S) in order to make the lattice positive-definite; the lattice with new pairing
is abbreviated by L(S)− .
   In the following, we shall frequently need the dual lattice M ∨ of a non-degenerate
integral lattice M:
                        M ∨ = {x ∈ MQ ; (x.y) ∈ Z ∀ y ∈ M}.
By integrality, one clearly has M ⊆ M ∨ as a sublattice of finite index | det(M)|,
with equality if and only if M is unimodular. Using the setup of Mordell-Weil
54                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

lattices, one can show that the orthogonal projection ϕ induces a commutative
diagram
                            MWL(S)0 ∼  =    L(S)−
                               ∩               ∩
                            MWL(S) ֒→ (L(S)− )∨
The bottom row embedding need not be an isomorphism; however, it is an iso-
morphism if NS(S) is unimodular. This relation proves very useful in the case of
rational elliptic surfaces.

11.13. Root lattice. For an even integral negative-definite lattice M, the roots
are all those elements x ∈ M with maximal self-intersection x2 = −2. The lattice
M is called a root lattice if it is generated by its roots. For instance, the Dynkin
diagrams An , Dm , E6 , E7 , E8 encode root lattices.
   To each fibre Fv , we can thus associate a root lattice Tv spanned by the com-
ponents not meeting the zero section. For an elliptic surface S, we define the root
lattice R(S) of S as the sublattice of NS(S) generated by the root lattices Tv :
                                    R(S) = ⊕v Tv .
By definition, the root lattice R(S) is exactly the intersection of the trivial lattice
T (S) and the frame W (S).

11.14. Mordell-Weil lattices of rational elliptic surfaces. Recall that a
rational elliptic surface has unimodular Néron-Severi group
                               NS(S) ∼
                                     = hŌ, F i ⊕ E8 .
Since the root lattice R(S) sits imside the frame W (S), we obtain an embedding
of R(S) into E8 . From what we have seen before (in particular from MWL(S) ∼   =
(L(S)− )∨ ), one can deduce the following relation between root lattice R(S) and
Mordell-Weil lattice MWL(S):
Theorem 11.6 (Shioda [93, Thm. 10.3]). Up to lattice automorphisms, the em-
bedding
                             R(S) ֒→ E8
determines both E(K) as an abstract group and MWL(S) as a lattice.
11.15. The previous theorem creates the possibility to classify the Mordell-Weil
lattices of rational elliptic surfaces by purely lattice-theoretic means. We sum up
the relevant results.
Theorem 11.7 (Dynkin). There are exactly 70 root lattices R 6= 0, E8 embedding
into E8 .
     Here the embedding R ֒→ E8 is unique up to lattice automorphisms unless
                         R = A7 , A23 , A5 ⊕ A1 , A3 ⊕ A21 , A41
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 55

For each ambiguous root lattice, there are two different families of (generally
semi-stable) rational elliptic surfaces associated: one with torsion sections and
one without. We have already seen this for R = A7 in 11.11.1.
  On the other hand, there are three root lattices embedded into E8 as in
Thm. 11.7 which are not compatible with the rational elliptic surfaces require-
ment that
                              e(R(S)) ≤ e(S) = 12.
These root lattices are A41 ⊕D4 , A81 , A71 . In consequence, there are (70+2+5−3) =
74 possible embeddings of root lattices R(S) of rational elliptic surfaces S into
E8 up to lattice automorphism. In each case, [70] determines the exact shape of
MWL(S), MWL(S)0 and E(K)tor .

11.16. Corollaries. Without details, we note the following corollaries of the clas-
sification of Mordell-Weil lattices of rational elliptic surfaces in [70].

Corollary 11.8. For a rational elliptic surface, E(K) takes the following shapes
as an abstract group:

                           E(K)tor   r = rank E(K)
                             {0}        0≤r≤8
                            Z/2Z        0≤r≤4
                            Z/3Z        0≤r≤2
                           (Z/2Z)2      0≤r≤2
                            Z/4Z        0≤r≤1
                            Z/5Z            0
                            Z/6Z            0
                         Z/4Z × Z/2Z        0
                                  2
                           (Z/3Z)           0

  Note that for all torsion groups (except for (Z/3Z)2 where one can use the
Hesse pencil as in [91]) we have already seen examples in 7.10.1 – 7.11 – often
even with the right number of parameters r =rank E(K).

Corollary 11.9. For a rational elliptic surface, E(K) = hP ; h(P ) ≤ 2i.

   Even with the inequality h(P ) ≤ 2 replaced by h(P ) ≤ 2χ(S), the above
generation result does not hold true in general (cf. [70, Appendix 1]).
   Actually, there is a stronger result than Corollary 11.9 that follows from the
classification in [70] (cf. [101, Thm 3.4]):

Proposition 11.10. For a rational elliptic surface,

                              E(K) = hP ; P̄ .Ō = 0i.
56                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

11.17. Integral sections. The set in the preceeding two corollaries are always
finite: For the points with bounded height, this follows from the general property
of definite lattices of finite rank. For the second set, we only note that the sections
disjoint from O have bounded height h ≤ 2χ(S). It is this principle that allows
us to generalise Siegel’s theorem for elliptic curves over Z. Here we only have to
define the right notion of integrality.
   For an elliptic curve in Weierstrass form, the rational points other than O are
given by two rational functions
                            P = (X, Y ), X, Y ∈ k(C).
Here we can always make the Weierstrass form integral, i.e. after some transfor-
mations the coefficients ai live in the coordinate ring k[C]. Then any notion of
an integral section should certainly require X, Y ∈ k[C]. We call such a section
polynomial. Note that
                              X, Y 6∈ k[C] ⇒ P̄ .Ō > 0,
since P and O meet at the poles of X, Y – which in fact have to be common poles
since the Weierstrass form is integral. In other words, generally any section P
on an integral elliptic curve over k(C) admits polynomials X0 , Y0, Z ∈ k[C] such
that
                                P = (X0 /Z 2 , Y0/Z 3 ).
However, this only reflects integrality in the chosen affine model. So P could still
have poles in the other affine charts – or attain poles by minimalising. Therefore
it is convenient to write the coefficients X, Y as homogeneous functions of degree
2χ resp. 3χ over C. On a globally minimal integral model, it thus becomes
immediate that an affine polynomial section has a pole at ∞ if and only if
                           deg(X) > 2χ, deg(Y ) > 3χ.
Thus we call the section P integral if and only if it is polynomial and respects
the degree bounds after minimalising. Equivalently, P̄ .Ō = 0. Since integral
sections have bounded height h ≤ 2χ as we have seen, we deduce the analogue
of Siegel’s theorem:
Theorem 11.11. Any integral elliptic curve admits only finitely many integral
sections.
  Note that we can even allow the sections to have denominators of bounded
degree. More precisely, if the bound for the x-coordinate is 2d and for the y-
coordinate 3d, then there still is a height inequality h ≤ 2χ + 2d. Hence there
are only finitely many such sections.
  Integral points are sometimes also called everywhere integral to stress inte-
grality in all affine charts. They reveal interesting relations to Gröbner bases
and deformations of singularities. The situation on rational elliptic surfaces was
recently studied in [101].
                                   ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 57

   For polynomial sections, finiteness does only hold over fields of characteristic
zero (cf. [106, §III.12]). In contrast, positive characteristic sees finiteness results
for polynomial sections without further assumptions failing. For an example in
every characteristic p > 3 (where polynomial sections are in fact called integral),
see for instance [83, Prop. 9.1].

11.18. Finiteness revisited. With the above finiteness results for the Mordell-
Weil group, we can revisit Shafarevich’s finiteness problem for elliptic curves.
Recall the set-up of Thm. 2.8 and 6.14 that predicted good reduction outside a
finite set of places S. Over Q (or rather Z after switching to an integral model),
Shafarevich’s line of proof was to consider all possible discriminants ∆ – there
are only finitely many. Working with an integral Weierstrass forms
                      S:    y 2 = x3 − 3A x − 2B,       A, B ∈ Z
we have ∆ = 123 (A3 − B 2 ). Regrouping terms, this reads
(24)                        S′ :     B 2 = A3 − ∆/123
The latter describes an elliptic curve in the affine A, B-plane. By Siegel’s theorem,
this curve only has finitely many points with bounded denominator.
   For elliptic surfaces over a fixed curve C in characteristics 6= 2, 3, we can pursue
exactly the same approach (with Z replaced by the coordinate ring k[C]). Then
the Weierstrass form (24) defines an (isotrivial) elliptic surface S ′ over k[C]. As a
little subtlety, this very Weierstrass form may not be minimal, since ∆ may have
roots of high multiplicity; however, this issue does not cause any problems with
integral points: they attain bounded denominators upon minimalising, but the
height stays bounded. In particular, any elliptic surface over C with discriminant
∆ can be considered as an (almost) integral section on S ′ . By 11.17, these sections
are finite in number.

11.19. Galois invariance. We conclude this investigation of Mordell-Weil lat-
tices by noting two properties that are of relevance in arithmetic settings. These
properties refer to the two ways of extending the function field k(C): by extension
of the base field k or base change C ′ → C.
   We retain the usual notation of an elliptic curve E over the functions field
K = k(C) of a projective curve C. Let k̄ denote the algebraic closure of k.
Tacitly, we shall denote the base extension of E from k(C) to k̄(C) also by E
(distinguished by the respective sets of rational points).
Proposition 11.12. For any σ ∈ Gal(k̄/k) and for any points P, Q ∈ E(k̄(C)),
the height pairing is Galois-invariant:
               P σ , Qσ ∈ E(k̄(C))     with   < P σ , Qσ >=< P, Q > .
58                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

  The proof of the proposition builds on the associated elliptic surface S → C
over k. The crucial property is that the orthogonal projection ϕ commutes with
the Galois action:
                         ϕ(P σ ) = ϕ(P )σ ∀ P ∈ E(k̄(C)).
The reason for this commutativity lies in the fact that the trivial lattice T (S)
is Galois invariant: the Galois action may permute singular fibres and/or fibre
components, but it fixes T (S) as a whole.
   In consequence, the proposition follows from the Galois-invariance of intersec-
tion numbers on projective varieties.
Remark 11.13. The assumption in [93, Prop. 8.13] that the base field k be perfect
is not necessary.
11.20. Base change. Assume we are given a morphism of projective curves C ′ →
C of degree d over some field k (not necessarily algebraically closed). By base
change, any elliptic curve E over k(C) can also be interpreted as an elliptic curve
over k(C ′ ). In particular, we can consider k(C)-rational points on E as elements
in E(k(C ′ )). How does this base change effect the height pairing (specified by
the function field over which we regard E)?
Proposition 11.14. In the above notation, let P, Q ∈ E(k(C)). Then
                      < P, Q >E(k(C ′ )) = d < P, Q >E(k(C)) .
  In essence, this property goes back to the corresponding elliptic surfaces S ′ , S
with rational map g : S ′ 99K S of degree d. For any D, E ∈ NS(S), we have
                              g ∗ (D).g ∗(E) = d D.E
Hence we only have to prove that pull-back from E(k(C)) resp. S commutes
with the orthogonal projection ϕ. This can be seen by restricting to the narrow
Mordell-Weil group E(K)0 and then applying the universal property of ϕ and
bilinearity. The precise details are given in the proof of [93, Prop. 8.12].


                          12. Elliptic K3 surfaces
  Elliptic fibrations are maybe most prominently featured in the theory of K3
surfaces. For example, K3 surfaces are singled out by the property that the same
surface may admit more than one elliptic fibration (Lem. 12.18). On the other
hand, there are also several conjectures concerning algebraic surfaces which are
not known in general, but for elliptic K3 surfaces with section. Throughout this
section, we will explore selected aspects of elliptic K3 surfaces, mainly concerning
existence and classification questions. We start by reviewing some of the general
theory before going into elliptic K3 surfaces (cf. [4] and the references therein).
                               ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 59

12.1. K3 surfaces.
Definition 12.1. A smooth surface X is called K3 if
    • the canonical bundle is trivial,
    • h1 (X, OX ) = 0.
   Mostly we will consider projective K3 surfaces. The name supposedly refers
to Kähler, Kummer and Kodaira (the reasons for these references will become
clear soon). The original definition albeit goes back to A. Weil who considered all
smooth surfaces with the same differentiable structure as a quartic in P3 . Over
C, all K3 surfaces are diffeomorphic and deformation equivalent. In particular,
they are simply connected, as conjectured by Weil and Andreotti. The conjecture
was proved by Kodaira in [38], using the theory of analytic elliptic surfaces.
Example 12.2. (i) Quartics in P3 – either smooth or with isolated rational dou-
      ble point singularities after a minimal (crepant) desingularisation;
 (ii) smooth intersections of degree (2, 3) in P4 or (2, 2, 2) in P5 ;
(iii) double sextics: double coverings of P2 branched along a sextic curve (smooth
      or after resolving isolated rational double point singularities);
(iv) Kummer surfaces: starting from an abelian surface A, we consider the quo-
      tient by the involution −1 and resolve the 16 ordinary double points on
      A/h−1i (see Example 12.6).
  The Hodge diamond of a K3 surface is easily computed with Serre duality and
Noether’s formula:
                                     1
                                 0       0
                             1      20       1
                                 0       0
                                     1

12.2. K3 lattice. We deduce that a K3 surface has second Betti number b2 = 22.
Cup-product equips H 2 (X, Z) with the structure of an integral lattice of rank 22.
Often this lattice is called K3 lattice and denoted by Λ. The following properties
of Λ are well-known:
     • Λ is unimodular by Poincaré-duality;
     • Λ has signature (3, 19) by the topological index theorem;
     • Λ is even by Wu’s formula since the first Chern class is even.
Hence the classification of even unimodular lattices implies that
                                  Λ∼
                                   = U 3 ⊕ E82 .
A marking φ of a K3 surface X is given by an explicit isomorphism
                                              ∼
                                              =
                               φ : H 2 (X, Z) −→ Λ.
60                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

12.3. Torelli theorem. Lattice theory is a crucial tool to study K3 surfaces.
Its importance was pointed out in the pioneering work by Pjatetki-Shapiro and
Shafarevich [74]. Recall that an isometry of lattices is an isomorphism of Z-
modules preserving the intersection form. A Hodge isometry is moreover required
to preserve the Hodge decomposition after C-linear extension.
Theorem 12.3 (Weak Torelli Theorem). Two complex K3 surfaces X, X ′ are
isomorphic if and only if there exists a Hodge isometry
                                            ∼
                                            =
                           φ : H 2 (X, Z) −→ H 2 (X ′ , Z).
   A Hodge isometry is called effective if it preserves the Kähler cone (i.e. if X
ia algebraic, then the isometry preserves ample divisors). The strong Torelli
Theorem extends the weak Torelli Theorem to the point that the isomorphism
         ∼
         =
f : X ′ −→ X is uniquely determined by the condition f ∗ = φ if φ is effective.
   The statements made in this paragraph are valid for all K3 surfaces, also non-
algebraic ones (which are nonetheless Kähler by a theorem of Siu [108]).

12.4. Moduli. K3 surfaces admit a beautiful moduli theory. Over C, they can
be studied through the period map. Here one fixes a nowhere vanishing holo-
morphic 2-form ωX up to scalars and chooses a basis {γ1 , . . . , γ22 } of H 2 (X, Z).
Then the period point pX associated to the K3 surface X is
                            Z               Z   
                      pX =      ωX , . . . ,   ωX ∈ P21 .
                                 γ1             γ22

In fact, the image of the period map lies in a open subset of P20 as
                        Z                 Z
                          ωX ∧ ωX = 0,       ωX ∧ ω̄X > 0.

This 20-dimensional space is called the period domain Ω of K3 surfaces. The
nice moduli behaviour of K3 surfaces is illustrated by the following fact: If X
varies in a local complete family of K3 surfaces, parametrised by a complex
manifold M, then there is a local isomorphism M → Ω. For a global description,
the degeneration at the boundary has to be taken into account, cf. [40].
  Now we specialise to projective K3 surfaces. Let γ ∈ H 2 (X, Z) be algebraic.
Then                                Z
                                          ωX = 0,
                                      γ

since the integral over ωX vanishes along any irreducible curve in X. In the
moduli space, this yields the intersection of Ω with a hyperplane. Thus algebraic
K3 surfaces have 19-dimensional moduli, and we achieve a stratification of the
moduli space in terms of the Picard number (note that ρ ≤ 20 in characteristic
zero).
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                   61

12.5. Polarisation. On an algebraic K3 surface, one fixes a polarisation, i.e. an
ample divisor H with self-intersection H 2 = 2 d. For instance, the hyperplane
section on a quartic in P3 is an ample divisor of self-intersection 4. Similarly, on
a double sextic the hyperplane section on P2 pulls back to an ample divisor of
self-intersection 2. Then one commonly considers moduli of polarised K3 surfaces.
   One can extend polarisations to the notion of lattice polarisations. Here
we let M denote a non-degenerate even integral lattice of signature (1, r). A K3
surface X is M-polarised if there is a primitive embedding
                                   M ֒→ NS(X).
Proposition 12.4 ([57, Cor. 1.9]). Let M be an even non-degenerate integral lat-
tice of signature (1, r). If M has a primitive embedding into Λ, then M-polarised
complex K3 surfaces admit a local moduli space of dimension 19 − r.
12.6. Positive characteristic. In positive characteristic, the moduli question
has a completely different flavour since there can be supersingular K3 surfaces
with ρ = 22. Surprisingly, the supersingular K3 surfaces themselves admit a
nice moduli theory which was discovered by Artin in [1] and greatly extended
by Ogus [71]. Over F̄p , the Tate conjecture [111] implies that any K3 surface
should have even Picard number. One reason (but certainly not the only one) to
consider K3 surfaces admitting an elliptic fibration with section is that the Tate
conjecture holds true for them by [2].
  Remarkably there are also Torelli theorems for K3 surfaces in positive charac-
teristic. This has been proved in the supersingular case by Ogus [72] and in the
ordinary case by Nygaard [66]. Proposition 12.4 has an analogue for ordinary
K3 surfaces in positive characteristic in the context of canonical liftings, see [17],
[67].

12.7. Elliptic K3 surfaces. An elliptic K3 surface X always has base curve P1
by Thm. 6.12. If X admits a section, then by 4.10 there is a globally minimal
generalised Weierstrass form
    X : y 2 + a1 x y + a3 y = x3 + a2 x2 + a4 x + a6 ai ∈ k[t], deg(ai ) ≤ 2i.
To give an impression of the possibilities, we discuss two instructive examples.
Example 12.5. One can derive elliptic K3 surfaces X from rational elliptic surfaces
S by quadratic base change over P1 . Here one only has to avoid ramification at
non-reduced fibres. The quadratic twist S ′ of S at the two ramification points
is also K3. Over C, the K3 surfaces X, S ′ are isogenous in a certain sense by
[27]. In particular, they have the same Picard number. Note that ρ(X) ≥ 10 by
inspection of the trivial lattice and Prop. 11.14.
Example 12.6. Let E, E ′ denote elliptic curves. Consider the Kummer surface X
for E × E ′ (outside characteristic two). There are several simple models for X.
62                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

For instance, if E, E ′ are given in Weierstrass form
                    E:     y 2 = f (x),      and    E′ :       y 2 = g(x),
then X can be defined as the desingularisation of the double sextic
                                X:        y 2 = f (x) g(x′).
On the other hand, the projections onto the two factors induce elliptic fibrations
of X. Projection onto E ′ yields the isotrivial elliptic fibration
(25)                          X:     g(t) y 2 = f (x)
which is readily converted to an extended Weierstrass form. This elliptic fibration
has four singular fibres of type I∗0 at the zeroes of g and ∞. There is full two-
torsion in the Mordell-Weil group given by y = 0 and the zeroes of f (x).
  The Picard number of the Kummer surface X is determined by E, E ′ as follows:
                         ρ(X) = 16 + 2 + rank Hom(E, E ′ ).
Over C, the Picard number thus only depends on the properties whether E, E ′
are isogenous and have complex multiplication (CM):
                
                             ′
                18, if E, E are not isogenous;
                
(26)     ρ(X) = 19, if E, E ′ are isogenous, but do not have CM;
                20, if E, E ′ are isogenous and have CM.
                

In each case, the trivial lattice stays the same:
                                   T (X) = U ⊕ D44 .
Comparing with Cor. 6.13, we deduce that the Mordell-Weil group of the given
isotrivial fibrations has rank 0 resp. 1 resp. 2 in the above three cases. In Example
12.11, we will investigate further elliptic fibrations on such Kummer surfaces.
12.8. Quasi-elliptic fibrations. In characteristic 2 and 3, smooth projective
surfaces may admit quasi-elliptic fibrations: i.e. there is a morphism to a pro-
jective curve such that the general fibre is a cuspidal rational curve. In other
characteristics, the smoothness assumption for the surface prevents the general
fibre from being singular. A detailed account of the theory of quasi-elliptic sur-
faces can be found in the book by Cossec and Dolgachev [15].
   Although many concepts from the theory of elliptic surfaces carry over to
quasi-elliptic surfaces, there are a few exceptional properties:
      • Any quasi-elliptic surface X → C with section admits a purely inseparable
        cover of degree p by a ruled surface. In particular, if C ∼
                                                                  = P1 , then X is
        unirational and thus ρ(X) = b2 (X).
      • X admits only certain additive fibre types depending on the characteristic.
      • There is a different Euler number formula than Thm. 6.10, since the gen-
        eral fibre has e(F ) = 2. Accordingly, there is a different notion of dis-
        criminant to detect singular fibres.
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                   63

     • The sections admit the structure of a finite abelian group MW(X). This
       group is in fact p-elementary, but its length may exceed two.
     • The structure theorems from section 6 apply. For instance, they give
                 ρ(X) = rank(T (X)), MW(X) = T (X)′ /T (X).
Thus any “genus one fibration” with a section of infinite order is necessarily
elliptic. To verify this, it suffices to compute the height of the section as in 11.8.
Example 12.7. Consider a Kummer surface of product type as in Ex. 12.6. If the
cubics f, g are defined over some number field and reduce nicely modulo (a prime
above) 2 without multiple zeroes, then (25) defines a quasi-elliptic K3 surface
with section over F̄2 . In contrast to the usual situation, there are five singular
fibres of type I∗0 , namely at the zeroes of g(t) including ∞ and at the (double)
zero of the formal derivative of g(t).
12.9. It will be very convenient to have a characterisation of elliptic fibrations
on K3 surfaces in terms of lattice theory. Recall that any fibre F of an elliptic
surface has self-intersection F 2 = 0. On a K3 surface X, the converse statement
also holds true. For ease of notation, we shall employ the following convention
throughout the next two paragraphs:
   Disclaimer for 12.9, 12.10: In characteristic 2 and 3, the notion of elliptic
fibration includes quasi-elliptic fibrations.
   This disclaimer is necessary since from the abstract information given in the
propositions and corollaries, it is in general impossible to detect whether the
fibration is elliptic or quasi-elliptic.
Proposition 12.8 ([74, §3, Thm. 1]). A K3 surface X admits an elliptic fibration
(not necessarily with section) if and only if there is a divisor 0 6= D ∈ NS(X)
with D 2 = 0.
   The main idea to prove the proposition is to apply reflections and inversions
to D until it becomes effective. Then the linear system |D| induces the elliptic
fibration.
Corollary 12.9. Any K3 surface with Picard number ρ ≥ 5 admits an elliptic
fibration.
   By assumption, NS(X) is an indefinite lattice of rank at least five. It is well-
known that any such quadratic form represents zero. Hence the corollary follows
from Prop. 12.8. The general situation on algebraic K3 surfaces is as follows:
                         ρ≥5            elliptic fibration
                         ρ = 2, 3, 4    depends on X
                         ρ=1            no elliptic fibration
64                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

12.10. The previous considerations did not address the question of a section.
However, one can easily obtain a more precise description from [74, §3, Thm. 1]:

Proposition 12.10. Let X be a K3 surface. Assume that D is an effective
divisor on X that has the same type as a singular fibre of an elliptic fibration.
Then X admits a unique elliptic fibration with D as a singular fibre. Moreover,
any irreducible curve C on X with D.C = 1 induces a section of the elliptic
fibration.

   Yet another equivalent way to phrase this abstractly is to ask for an embedding
of the hyperbolic plane U into NS(X):

                                   U ֒→ NS(X).

If NS(X) = U ⊕ M, then M is related to the induced elliptic fibration by [39,
Lem. 2.1]: Let F denote any fibre. Then

                             M∼
                              = F ⊥ /hF i ⊂ NS(X).

More specifically, if M decomposes into an orthogonal sum of root lattices associ-
ated to Dynkin diagrams, then they correspond to singular fibres of the fibration
by a result of Kondō [39, Lem. 2.2]. This last statement can also be viewed as a
special case of Lem. 8.3.

Example 12.11. On the Kummer surface of E × E ′ in Ex. 12.6 (char(k) 6= 2),
we have singled out 24 rational curves on the two isotrivial fibrations: the com-
ponents of the four I∗0 fibres and the torsion sections. This configuration is also
known as the double Kummer pencil. In Fig. 7, the double components and
two-torsion sections are represented by the vertical and horizontal lines.
   One can easily find further divisors of Kodaira type. For instance in [103], a II∗
fibre is found together with a section and two orthogonal effective divisors which
yield further non-reduced singular fibres (see 13.4). The next figure sketches an
elliptic fibration with two IV∗ fibres which are marked in blue and red. For this
fibration, all other curves from the double Kummer pencil serve as sections.


12.11. With the tools exploited in the preceeding sections, we shall aim at two
different kinds of classifications of elliptic K3 surfaces:
     • Configurations of singular fibres on all elliptic K3 surfaces with section;
     • Elliptic fibrations with section on a given K3 surfaces.
  These classifications will be sketched throughout the next sections. They will
require some additional techniques from lattice theory which will be introduced
along the way.
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 65




                       Figure 7. Double Kummer pencil

12.12. Configurations on elliptic K3 surfaces: Existence. In Example
12.5, we have already seen two methods to produce elliptic K3 surfaces: by
quadratic base change or quadratic twisting from rational elliptic surfaces. How-
ever, since these surfaces do always have Picard number ρ ≥ 10, these ideas do
not suffice to cover all elliptic K3 surfaces.
  Abstractly, we could also argue with Prop. 12.10 and try to find lattice polarised
K3 surfaces, i.e. with any given shape of the Néron-Severi group as in Prop. 12.4.
In practice, however, this may be a difficult undertaking – often it is achieved
using the theory of elliptic fibrations as developped in this section and not vice
versa!
  Thirdly, we have the deformation argument of 10.3 at our hands. Like for
rational elliptic surfaces, this argument reduces the existence problem to check-
ing which configurations of extremal elliptic K3 surfaces can exist. Afterwards,
we will review lattice theoretic means to prove non-existence for the remaining
configurations.
12.13. Extremal elliptic K3 surfaces. Recall that an extremal elliptic surface
has maximal Picard number, yet finite Mordell-Weil group. Contrary to rational
elliptic surfaces, we encounter on the level of K3 surfaces that the notions of
extremal elliptic K3 surfaces differ in characteristic zero and p > 0: In charac-
teristic zero, the maximal Picard number is ρ = 20. Such K3 surfaces are called
singular in the sense of exceptional, as they are lying isolated, but dense in the
moduli space of K3 surfaces.
   Singular K3 surfaces play an improtant role in the arithmetic of K3 surfaces.
We will briefly explore their properties in 13.1. Note that we have already seen
singular K3 surfaces in Example 12.6: Kummer surfaces for isogenous elliptic
curves with CM. However, we have also realised that the obvious elliptic fibrations
on these Kummer surfaces are not extremal: they have Mordell-Weil rank two.
   In contrast, extremal elliptic K3 surfaces in positive characteristic are very
rare. Since they are supersingular by definition, they can be traced back to
66                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

rational elliptic surfaces by purely inseparable base change. Confer [28] for a full
treatment.

12.14. Dessins d’enfant. In this section, we work over C (or a number field).
For an extremal elliptic fibration over P1 , all the ramification of the j-map occurs
at three point 0, ∞ and 1 (or 123 depending on the normalisation). Hence we
have in fact three equivalent representations:
(1) through the j-map, a Belyi map of degree n;
(2) through the monodromy representation σ0 , σ1 , σ∞ ∈ Sn ;
(3) through the dessin d’enfant j −1 ([0, 1]) associated to the Belyi map j.
  In essence, the first maps are geometric (or arithmetic) objects while the second
representations are a priori purely combinatorial. In this respect, the dessins
d’enfant could be regarded as intermediate between the other two (see for instance
[44] for details).
   In order to prove the existence of an extremal configuration of elliptic fibres,
it suffices to derive one of the three representations with the corresponding prop-
erties. In [55], Miranda and Persson exhibited monodromy representations for
all semi-stable extremal elliptic K3 surfaces. Recently, Beukers and Montanus
derived explicit defining equations for all these surfaces in [7]. A crucial ingre-
dient for this explicit work was the fact that the number of inequivalent dessins
d’enfant can be determined by representation theoretic means.
   Here we shall only sketch one example, which is the first case in the list of
Miranda and Persson [55]. Prior to [7] its defining equation was determined
by one of us in [97]. In fact, extremal elliptic surfaces are closely related to
the extreme case of the abc-theorem and in particular to Davenport’s inequality
(cf. [100]). Over C, one can thus prove existence and finiteness theorems for semi-
stable extremal elliptic surfaces over P1 for any fixed arithmetic genus χ ≥ 1.
Example 12.12. An elliptic K3 surface can maximally have singular fibres of type
I19 or I∗14 (if one does not restrict to semistable case). In characteristic zero, this
bound follows from Cor. 6.13. For positive characteristic (6= 2), the proof in [79]
combines the theory of supersingular K3 surfaces with Mordell-Weil lattices.
   As for existence, we shall only prove this over some number field by drawing
an appropriate dessin d’enfant. Explicitly we only visualise the preimages of 0
under j which appear as vertices with three adjacent edges.
   Note that the dessin d’enfant is symmetric, as the (unique) elliptic surface can
in fact be defined over Q [97]. Thus it also reduces nicely mod p for almost all
primes p (cf. [84] where also uniqueness is proven for any characteristic 6= 2).
12.15. Configurations on elliptic K3 surfaces: Non-existence. In order to
prove that elliptic K3 surfaces do not admit certain configurations of singular
fibres, we will use similar techniques as in section 10; in particular, we will again
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  67



                                                ✟✟
                                                   r
                                              ✟✟
                                             ✟
                                           r✟
                                         ✟✟
                                                   r
                                       ✟✟
                                     ✟✟
                      r             ✟
                                   r❍
                                     ❍❍
                                       ❍❍
                                         ❍❍r
                                            ❍❍
                                                   r
                                              ❍❍
                                                ❍❍
                                                   r



                 Figure 8. Dessin d’enfant for the I19 fibration

build the quotient by torsion sections. However, there is one substantial differ-
ence: NS(X) need not be unimodular (and unless ρ(X) = 2, so that NS(X) = U,
it will not be unimodular in general).
   Hence we have to develop different criteria. The configuration of singular
fibres is encoded in the trivial lattice T (X) of an elliptic surface X with section.
If e(X) = 12χ(X) is a multiple of 24 (e.g. if X is K3), then the zero section has
even self-intersection Ō 2 = −χ(X). Hence zero section and general fibre generate
an even unimodular lattice, the hyperbolic plane U. In particular, NS(X) is an
even lattice by Lem. 8.2. Hence we can apply techniques from the theory of even
lattices as developped by Nikulin [62]. In the context of elliptic fibrations, these
techniques have first been employed systematically by Miranda and Persson [55].
12.16. Discriminant group and discriminant form. Let L denote an even
integral non-degenerate lattice L with quadratic form (·, ·). We define its dual
L∨ by
                     L∨ = {x ∈ L ⊗ Q; (x, y) ∈ Z ∀ y ∈ L}.
Then the discriminant group GL of L is the finite abelian group
                                    GL = L∨ /L.
Example 12.13. For a Dynkin diagram W , let V be the corresponding type of
singular fibre from 6.5 (regardless of the ambiguity in case W = A1 or A2 ). Then
the discriminant group GW of W equals G(V ) in the notation of Lemma 7.3.
  We now consider the following set-up: N is an even unimodular lattice (think
Λ). We assume that the non-degenerate lattice L embeds primitively into N. Let
M denote the orthogonal complement of L in N:
                                  M = L⊥ ⊂ N.
Proposition 12.14 ([62, Prop. 1.6.1]). Under the above assumptions, GL ∼
                                                                       = GM .
68                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

   Most of the time, the above result is applied to the full Néron-Severi group of a
given surface X (with H 2 (X, Z) even). Here, however, we are mainly concerned
with the configuration of singular fibres. Hence we have to take the subtlety into
account that the trivial lattice T (X) of an elliptic surface need not be primitive
in NS(X). By 7.1, we obtain the primitive closure T (X)′ after saturating T (X)
by adding the torsion sections.
    The basic idea now is to compare the length of GT (X) against the maximum
possible length of the discriminant group of (T (X)′ )⊥ . The latter equals b2 (X) −
rank(T (X)). We now specialise to the K3 case where Λ is in fact even of rank
b2 (X) = 22:
   Length criterion: Let X be an elliptic K3 surface with section. If the p-length
of GT (X) exceeds 22 − rank(T (X)), then X admits a p-torsion section.
  But then we can consider the quotient by (translation by) the p-torsion section.
Whenever the Euler numbers of the resulting singular fibres do not sum up to
24, we establish a contradiction.
Lemma 12.15. The configurations [1, 27 , 9], [27 , 3, 7], [27, 52 ] do not exist.
Proof. By the length criterion, each of these configurations implies the existence
of a 2-torsion section. But then the odd fibres imply that the quotient has Euler
number at least 7 · 1 + 2 · 10 = 27, contradiction.                             

   For all other n-tuples (n ≥ 9), Miranda and Persson [55] prove existence
through the deformation argument from 10.3. On the other hand, all 6-, 7-
and 8-tuples deforming to either of those from Lemma 12.15 cannot exist. Prov-
ing non-existence for other n-tuples with n = 6, 7, 8 requires some further criteria
(see [55]). Here we shall only introduce the discriminant form which will be of
later use.
   The discriminant form qL of an even, integral and non-degenerate lattice L
is defined as the induced quadratic form on the discriminant group:
                             qL : GL → Q/2Z
                                   x 7→ x2 mod 2Z.
Proposition 12.16 ([62, Prop. 1.6.1]). Under the assumptions of Prop. 12.14,
qL = −qM .
   Nikulin moreover showed that the genus of an even lattice (i.e. its isogeny
class) is determined by signature and discriminant form [62, Cor. 1.9.4]. There
are specific cases where the genus of a lattice consists of a single class. For
definite lattices, this typically requires that both rank and (the absolute value
of the) discriminant are relatively small (cf. [12, §15, Cor. 22]). For indefinite
lattices, the situation differs significantly:
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                   69

Proposition 12.17 (Kneser [35], Nikulin [62, Cor. 1.13.3]). Let L be an indefinite
even lattice. If the length of GL does not exceed rank(L) − 2, then the genus of L
consists of a single class.
12.17. There is also a purely lattice-theoretic approach towards configurations
of singular fibres. Namely we consider lattice polarised K3 surfaces and apply
Prop. 12.4. If the trivial lattice of a given configuration embeds primitively into
Λ, then this suffices to prove existence by Kondō’s argument from 12.10.
   The argument becomes more involved as soon as the configuration forces sec-
tions by the length criterion. But then Lemma 8.3 shows how to recover the
singular fibres from the frame. This approach has been pursued with great suc-
cess by Shimada and Zhang:
      • In [87], Shimada classifies all possible configurations on elliptic K3 sur-
        faces including the torsion subgroups of MW. For the extra criterion
        implementing torsion sections, confer [87, Thm. 7.1].
      • In [89], Shimada and Zhang classify all extremal elliptic K3 surfaces. This
        classification extends [55] in two directions: the authors also treat configu-
        rations that are not semi-stable, and they determine Mordell-Weil groups
        and transcendental lattices (cf. 13.1).
12.18. Elliptic fibrations. By the Kodaira-Enriques classification of algebraic
surfaces (cf. [4]), only K3 surfaces and abelian surfaces have trivial canonical
bundle. In consequence, any other surface can admit at most one elliptic fibration
with section:
Lemma 12.18. Assume that the surface S admits two distinct elliptic fibrations
with section which are not of product type. Then S is a K3 surface.
Proof. If KS is not trivial, then the canonical bundle formula (Thm. 6.8) implies
that any two fibres of the two fibrations are algebraically equivalent. Hence the
fibrations are isomorphic. If KS is trivial, then S cannot be abelian, since the
fibrations are not of product type; thus S is K3.                              
   If we let go the condition of a section, then there are also Enriques surfaces
to be considered. Enriques surfaces (outside characteristic two) are quotients of
K3 surfaces by fixed point-free involutions. They can be studied purely in terms
of their universal covers – which return the original K3 surfaces. In particular
an elliptic fibration on an Enriques surface (without section) induces an elliptic
fibration on the covering K3 surface (which may well admit a section). For general
details, see [15]. Remarkably, several classification problems for elliptic fibrations
and beyond have first been solved for Enriques surfaces (see [3] for an instance).
12.19. Elliptic fibrations on a K3 surface. On a single K3 surface, the elliptic
fibrations with section can be classified by several means. To our knowledge,
Oguiso was the first to establish a complete classification of elliptic fibrations
on complex Kummer surfaces for E × E ′ as in Example 12.6 in case E, E ′ are
70                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

not isogenous [69]. Oguiso pursued an essentially geometric technique based on
finiteness arguments of Sterk [109] that also allowed him to detect (infinitely
many) non-isomorphic fibrations with the same configuration of singular fibres.
On the other hand, Sterk showed in [109] that any K3 surface X does only have
finitely many elliptic fibrations up to Aut(X).
   Another approach towards this problem is based on lattice theoretic ideas. An
essential ingredient is a gluing technique which can be traced back to Witt and
Kneser [36]. From this technique and the classifcation of definite unimodular
lattices of rank 24 in [60], Nishiyama developed an elegant method to classify all
elliptic fibrations on a given K3 surface in [63]. This technique moreover builds
on a converse of Nikulin’s results in 12.16:
Theorem 12.19 ([62, Cor. 1.6]). Let L, M be even non-degenerate integral lat-
tices such that
                           GL ∼= GM , qL = −qM .
Then there exists a unimodular overlattice N of L ⊕ M such that both L and M
embed primitively into N and are each other’s orthogonal complement:
                          L = M ⊥ ⊂ N,      M = L⊥ ⊂ N.
  Of course, we can apply the above theorem to the Néron-Severi lattice of any
K3 surface X. What makes elliptic fibrations special is the fact that the frame
W (X) is even and negative-definite of rank ρ(X) − 2 by Lem. 8.2. Hence we can
try to embed the frame into a negative-definite lattice. This brings the advantage
that negative-definite lattices of small rank have been fully classified. Note that in
the present case, W (X) has rank at most 18, so it suffices to consider unimodular
negative-definite lattices of rank 24. Luckily these so-called Niemeier lattices
admit a fairly simple classification in terms of their root lattices:
Theorem 12.20 ([60, Satz 8.3]). A negative-definite even unimodular lattice N
is determined by its root lattice Nroot up to isometry. There are 24 possibilities
for N.
   Given an elliptic K3 surface X, Nishiyama aims at embedding the frames of
all elliptic fibrations into Niemeier lattices. For this purpose he first determines
an even negative-definite lattice M such that
                     qM = −qNS(X) , rank(M) + ρ(X) = 26.
By Thm. 12.19, M ⊕ W has a Niemeier lattice as an overlattice for each frame W
of an elliptic fibration on X. Thus one is bound to determine the (inequivalent)
primitive embeddings of M into Niemeier lattices. To achieve this, it is essential to
consider the root lattices involved (as shown in [63]). In each case, the orthogonal
complement of M gives the corresponding frame W . Then one can read off
Mordell-Weil lattice (plus the torsion in MW) and singular fibres from W by
                                                       ′
                  T (X) = U ⊕ Wroot ,      MWL(X) = W/Wroot
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  71

12.20. Transcendental lattice. The existence of a negative-definite lattice M
as above was subsequently proven by Nishiyama in [64]. The argument starts from
the transcendental lattice of X, i.e. the orthogonal complement of NS(X) in
H 2 (X, Z) with respect to cup-product:
                          T(X) = NS(X)⊥ ⊂ H 2 (X, Z).
In general, T(X) is an even lattice of rank r = 22 − ρ(X) and signature (2, 20 −
ρ(X)). Let t = r − 2. By [62, Thm. 1.12.4], T(X)[−1] admits a primitive
embedding into the following indefinite unimodular lattice:
                              T(X)[−1] ֒→ U t ⊕ E8 .
Then we define M as the orthogonal complement of T(X)[−1] in U t ⊕ E8 . By
construction, this lattice is negative definite of rank t + 6 = r + 4 = 26 − ρ(X)
with discriminant form
                       qM = −qT(X)[−1] = qT(X) = −qNS(X) .
Hence M takes exactly the shape required for Nishiyama’s technique in 12.19.
12.21. It remains to discuss when the above technique guarantees the existence
of an elliptic fibration with fixed frame W on the given K3 surface X.
   First it is instructive to note that in any case there is some K3 surface with the
elliptic fibration specified by W . Apply Thm. 12.19 to T(X) and U ⊕W to derive
a primitive embedding of U ⊕ W into the K3 lattice Λ. By Prop. 12.4, there is
a family of K3 surfaces with Néron-Severi group NS = U ⊕ W . In particular,
each of these K3 surfaces admits an elliptic fibration with section and frame W
by 12.10.
   Now let us turn to the specific K3 surface X. Assume that we have found a
candidate frame W for an elliptic fibration on X by Nishiyama’s technique. By
construction, NS(X) and U ⊕ W have the same signature and discriminant form.
In particular, they lie in the same genus (cf. 12.16). We need to decide whether
this genus consists of a single class. In order to apply Prop. 12.17 to the complex
K3 case, the decisive property is that qNS(X) = −qT(X) by Prop. 12.16. Thus
NS(X) and T(X) have the same length, and the lattice of bigger rank (unless
both have rank 11) satisfies the condition of Prop. 12.17.
Lemma 12.21 ([57, Cor. 2.9, 2.10]). Let X be a complex K3 surface.
(a) If ρ(X) ≥ 12, then NS(X) is uniquely determined by signature and discrimi-
    nant form.
(b) If ρ(X) ≤ 10, then T(X) is uniquely determined by signature and discrimi-
    nant form.
  Applied to the above situation arising from Nishiyama’s technique, the lemma
implies that NS(X) and U ⊕ W are isomorphic if ρ(X) ≥ 12. By 12.10, X thus
admits an elliptic fibration with frame W .
72                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

12.22. Nishiyama applied this technique to several K3 surfaces. For instance, he
determined all elliptic fibrations on the complex Kummer surfaces from Example
12.6 for the following cases (thus also recovering Oguiso’s result [69]).
                         E, E ′         ρ(X) no. of fibrations
                   E∼= E ′ , j(E) = 0    20          30
                    ∼   ′
                  E = E , j(E) = 12   3
                                         20          25
                  E∼
                   = E ′ without CM 19               34
                                ′
                       E 6∼ E            18          11
Subsequently, the classification begun by Oguiso in [69] was taken up by Kuwata
and Shioda. In [43] they derive defining equations and elliptic parameters for all
fibrations in the last case.
12.23. Given a K3 surface X one can also ask the general question whether X
admits any elliptic fibration with section at all. Over C there is a uniform answer
if the Picard number is big enough:
Lemma 12.22. Every complex K3 surface of Picard number at least 13 admits
an elliptic fibration with section.
  The claim follows directly from a result of Nikulin [62, Cor. 1.13.5]. In detail,
Nikulin derived the following implication that relates the rank of an indefinite
even integral lattice L with its length, i.e. the minimum number of generators of
the discriminant group GL = L∨ /L:
                      rank(L) ≥ length(L) + 3 =⇒ U ֒→ L.
In the present situation, the length of NS(X) is trivially bounded by both the
rank of NS(X) and the rank of T(X). The latter is 22 −ρ(X) ≤ 9 by assumption.
Hence the inequality of rank against length holds for NS(X), and the embedding
of U into NS(X) gives an elliptic fibration with section.

                 13. Arithmetic of elliptic K3 surfaces
   Throughout this paper, we have tried to emphasise the importance of elliptic
fibrations for arithmetic considerations. In this section, we point out several
applications to K3 surfaces. We start by reviewing singular K3 surfaces. This
naturally leads to questions of Mordell-Weil ranks (13.8) and modularity (13.13).
We shall also briefly look into connections with Shimura curves, abelian surfaces
with real multiplication and rational points.
13.1. Singular K3 surfaces. Over C, the maximal Picard number for a K3 sur-
face X is ρ(X) = 20. The K3 surfaces attaining this bound are called singular.
We have seen specific examples in two instances:
     • extremal elliptic K3 surfaces (12.13, Example 12.12);
     • Kummer surfaces of isogenous CM-elliptic curves (Example 12.6).
                              ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                73

Note that the first examples constitute a finite set up to isomorphism. Hence we
shall concentrate on the Kummer surfaces.
  For a K3 surface X over C, recall the lattice T(X), i.e. the orthogonal comple-
ment of NS(X) in H 2 (X, Z) with respect to cup-product:
                         T(X) = NS(X)⊥ ⊂ H 2 (X, Z).
In general, T(X) is an even lattice of signature (2, 20 − ρ(X)). For a singular
K3 surface, the transcendental lattice is positive definite of rank two. Thus a
singular K3 surface X is uniquely determined by T(X) up to isomorphism due
to the Torelli Theorem. The intersection form on T(X) provides a useful link to
class group theory – and thereby to elliptic curves with complex multiplication
(CM).
13.2. Let us first consider singular abelian surfaces, i.e. complex abelian sur-
faces A with maximal Picard number ρ(A) = 4. One defines the transcendental
lattice T(A) as above. In [104], Shioda and Mitani showed that every singular
abelian surfaces is isomorphic to the product of isogenous CM elliptic curves.
The curves can be given explicitly in terms of T(A) as follows. The intersection
form on T(A) is expressed uniquely up to conjugation in SL2 (Z) by a quadratic
form
                                      
                                 2a b
(27)                  Q(A) =             ,  a, b, c ∈ Z.
                                  b 2c
We denote its discriminant by d = b2 − 4ac < 0. By [104], A is isomorphic to the
product of the following elliptic curves E, E ′ (written as complex tori):
                                  √                             √
                            −b + d                          b +   d
(28)         E = Eτ , τ =            ,   E ′ = Eτ ′ , τ ′ =         .
                               2a                              2
                                                                      √
  By construction, E and E ′ are isogenous with CM in K = Q( d). In partic-
ular, this result implies that every singular abelian surface can be defined over
the Hilbert class field H(d) (a certain abelian Galois extension of K with pre-
scribed ramification and Galois group Cl(d)), since the same holds for E and E ′
by Shimura’s work [90, §7].
13.3. The first approach towards singular K3 surfaces was to consider Kum-
mer surfaces of singular abelian surfaces as in Example 12.6. In general, the
transcendental lattice of a Kummer surface Km(A) is obtained from the abelian
surface A by multiplying the intersection form Q(A) on T(A) by a factor of 2 by
[74]:
                              T(Km(A)) = T(A)[2].
Hence any singular K3 surface X with T(X) two-divisible (as an even lattice)
can be realised as a Kummer surface for appropriate E, E ′ . However, the tran-
scendental lattice of a singular K3 surface need not be two-divisible as we will
see for the following extremal elliptic K3 surface.
74                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

Example 13.1. Consider the elliptic K3 surface X with an I19 fibre from Example
12.12. By Thm. 6.3, X has Néron-Severi group
                               NS(X) = U ⊕ A18 .

                               √ H (X, Z), the transcendental lattice T(X) has
                                  2
As its orthogonal complement in
discriminant d = −19. As Q( −19) has class number one, Q(X) is uniquely
represented by the quadratic form
                                            
                                        2 1
                               Q(X) =          .
                                        1 10
In particular, Q(X) is not two-divisible. Hence X cannot be isomorphic to a
Kummer surface over C.
13.4. Shioda-Inose structure. This failure of the Kummer map to be surjec-
tive was overcome by Shioda and Inose by means of elliptic fibrations on Kummer
surfaces [103]. They started with a Kummer surface of product type as in Exam-
ple 12.6. Explicitly they identified a divisor D of type II∗ in the double Kummer
pencil as mentioned in Example 12.11. This divisor is marked blue in the follow-
ing diagram of the double Kummer pencil:




            Figure 9. Singular fibres in the double Kummer pencil

   By Prop. 12.10, the Kummer surface admits an elliptic fibration with D as a
singular fibre and section corresponding to the rational curve marked in yellow.
As the red marked curves are perpendicular to D, they constitute further fibre
components. Thus there are two more reducible fibres. Shioda-Inose prove that
their types can only be I∗0 , I∗1 or possibly once IV∗ .
   Consider the quadratic base change X of this elliptic fibration on Km(E × E ′ )
ramified at the last two singular fibres. Since these fibres are non-reduced, the
base change has again e(X) = 24. Thus X is a K3 surface, and it is singular since
the surfaces are isogenous. Shioda and Inose proceeded to prove that X has the
same transcendental lattice as the original abelian surface A. This concludes the
construction of a singular K3 surface with any given transcendental lattice.
                                  ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                75

  Note that the deck transformation corresponding to the quadratic base change
defines a Nikulin involution on X: It has exactly eight isolated fixed points
and leaves the holomorphic 2-form invariant. The fixed points sit in the two
branch fibres; their resolution yields the corresponding fibres on the Kummer
surface. This general construction – abelian surface and K3 surface with the same
transcendental lattice such that Kummer quotient and Nikulin involution yield
the same Kummer surface – is nowadays referred to as Shioda-Inose structure.
                              A                       X
                                    ց           ւ
                                        Km(A)
The terminology was introduced by Morrison who worked out lattice theoretic
criteria to decide which K3 surfaces of Picard number ρ ≥ 17 admit a Shioda-
Inose structure [57]. Recently Kumar extended Shioda-Inose’s construction for
Kummer surfaces of product type to Jacobians of genus two curves [41]. This
time, elliptic fibrations with one fibre of type
II ∗ and III∗ each play the central role.

13.5. Inose fibration. The construction of Shioda-Inose can be defined over
some explicit number field:
(1) The elliptic curves E, E ′ are defined over the Hilbert class field H(d).
(2) The Kummer quotient respects the base field of the abelian surface (cf. Ex-
    ample 12.6).
(3) The field of definition of the divisor D of type II∗ only involves the 2-torsion
    of E and E ′ . Thus D and with it the elliptic fibration |D| are defined over
    H(d)(E[2], E ′[2]).
(4) The quadratic base change can be defined over the same field, since the
    ramification points are either both rational or conjugate quadratic as there
    cannot be any further singular fibres of the same type by the Euler number
    e(Km(A)) = 24.
The Shioda-Inose structure has some interesting consequences for the arithmetic
of a singular K3 surface X. For instance, over some extension of H(d) the zeta
function of X can be expressed in terms of Hecke characters [103, Thm. 6].
   Subsequently Inose exhibited an explicit model for the elliptic fibration on X
induced by the Shioda-Inose structure. By construction, this fibration has two
singular fibres of type II∗ . Hence it admits a Weierstrass equation of the following
shape (with II∗ ’s at 0, ∞):
(29)             X:    y 2 = x3 − 3 A t4 x + t5 (t2 − 2 B t + 1).
This fibration is often called Inose fibration. Inose showed in [27] that A and
B are related to the j-invariants of E, E ′ as follows:
          A3 = j(E) j(E ′ )/126 ,   B 2 = (1 − j(E)/123) (1 − j(E ′ )/123).
76                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

This gives a model of X over a degree six extension of H(d). In fact, the Inose
fibration can be twisted in such a way that the coefficients are already defined
over H(d) (cf. [81, Prop. 4.1]).
   The remaining singular fibres of Inose’s fibration are easily computed from E
and E ′ . We also list the Mordell-Weil ranks and the discriminants in the case
where X is singular, i.e. E and E ′ are isogenous with CM. In the non-CM case,
the MW-rank drops by one if E ∼ E ′ , resp. by two if E 6∼ E ′ (exactly as in
Example 12.6).

     E, E ′           j         sing fibres rank(MW)          d
     E∼
      = E′        j(E) = 0           IV         0            −3
                 j(E) = 123         2 I2        0            −4
                j(E) 6= 0, 123    I2 , 2 I1     1         6= −3, −4
     E∼
      6= E ′   j(E) j(E ′) = 0      2 II        2      −3 N 2 (N > 1)
               j(E) j(E ′) 6= 0     4 I1        2    −16, −28 or h(d) > 1
          Table 5. Mordell-Weil ranks of Inose’s fibration (CM case)



13.6. Automorphisms. Except for two cases, Inose’s fibration always has pos-
itive Mordell-Weil rank. Hence these singular K3 surfaces have infinite auto-
morphisms groups. Shioda–Inose made this observation and extended it to all
singular K3 surfaces:
Lemma 13.2. Any singular K3 surface has infinite automorphism group.
   To complete the proof of the lemma, Shioda and Inose pursued an explicit
geometric approach for the two remaining singular K3 surfaces [103, §5]. Later
Vinberg calculated the automorphism groups of these two “most algebraic” K3
surfaces completely [117]. Alternatively, we could use the classification of elliptic
fibrations on these K3 surfaces along the lines of 12.19. In [63], Nishiyama showed
that there are exactly six elliptic fibrations for d = −3 and 13 for d = −4. In
either case, X admits an elliptic fibration with Mordell-Weil rank one, so the
automorphism group is infinite.
13.7. We shall now start with the Inose fibration (29) and apply cyclic base
changes ramified at the II∗ fibres. For instance, a quadratic base change yields
another K3 surface X ′ with two singular fibres of type IV∗ instead of II∗ . Shioda
showed in [98] that X ′ returns in fact the Kummer surface Km(E × E ′ ) from
the Shioda-Inose structure – we have identified the singular fibres in the double
Kummer pencil in Example 12.11. Thus X is sandwiched by this very Kummer
surface.
  In general, all such cyclic base changes of degree n up to six return isogenous
K3 surfaces X (n) . By [99], the base change results in a multiplication of the
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 77

intersection form on the transcendental lattice by the degree:

                       T(X (n) ) = T(X)[n] (n = 1, . . . , 6).

13.8. Mordell-Weil ranks of elliptic K3 surfaces. By Cor. 6.13, a complex
elliptic K3 surface could have any Mordell-Weil rank from 0 to 18, since ρ ≤ 20.
Cox proved in [13] that all these ranks actually occur. This result is a consequence
of the surjectivity of the period map; however, Cox did not give any explicit
examples.
   To overcome this lack of examples, Kuwata considered the cyclic base changes
of Inose’s fibration from 13.7. He noticed that since ρ stays constant under
each base change, these surfaces provide explicit examples of complex elliptic K3
surfaces with any Mordell-Weil rank from 0 to 18 except for 15 [42]. Here we
produce a table of the fibre configurations and Mordell-Weil ranks (Table 6).


                             E∼  = E′          E∼6= E ′        E ∼ E′  E 6∼ E ′
     degree         config          MW-rank
                                      (        config         MW-rank
                                                                (     MW-rank
                                        1                        2
        1      2 II∗ , I2 , 2 I1              2 II∗ , 4 I1                0
                                        0                        1
                                      (                         (
                                        4                        6
        2     2 IV∗ , 2 I2 , 4 I1             2 IV∗ , 8 I1                4
                                        3                        5
                                      (                        (
                                        7                        10
        3      2 I∗0 , 3 I2 , 6 I1            2 I∗0 , 12 I1               8
                                        6                        9
                                      (                        (
                                       10                        14
        4     2 IV, 4 I2 , 8 I1               2 IV, 16 I1                 12
                                       9                         13
                                      (                        (
                                       13                        18
        5     2 II, 5 I2 , 10 I1              2 II, 20 I1                 16
                                       12                        17
                                      (                        (
                                       12                        18
        6        6 I2 , 12 I1                    24 I1                    16
                                       11                        17
    Table 6. Mordell-Weil ranks of cyclic base changes of Inose’s fibration


  The configurations are valid under the assumptions that in the first case
j(E) 6= 0, 123, and in the second case j(E) j(E ′ ) 6= 0. The Mordell-Weil ranks
are computed from the Picard number given in Example 12.6 by Cor. 6.13. In
the first two cases, we list both the Mordell-Weil ranks in the CM case and in the
non-CM case. By inspection, the ranks cover all numbers from 0 to 18 except for
15.
78                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

13.9. Kloosterman filled the gap in Kuwata’s list by exhibiting an elliptic K3
surface with Mordell-Weil rank 15 [32]. Here we briefly sketch his construction.
   Let S be a rational elliptic surface with a fibre of type III∗ and three I1 ’s. These
surfaces have Mordell-Weil rank one by Cor. 6.13 and come in a one-dimensional
family (write down the general Weierstrass form of a rational elliptic surface with
an III∗ fibre).
   We construct an auxiliary K3 surface X ′ by applying a general quadratic base
change to S. Then the trivial lattice T (X ′ ) has rank 16, as it equals U ⊕ E72 .
For general X ′ , the Néron-Severi group is thus generated by T (X ′ ) and the pull-
back of the MW-generator of S. Since quadratic base changes over P1 have two
moduli, X ′ lives in a three-dimensional family with ρ(X ′ ) ≥ 17. Hence the general
member actually has ρ = 17.
   Finally, we exhibit the cyclic base change of degree 4 to X ′ that ramifies at
the two III∗ fibres. In general, this yields another elliptic K3 surface X with only
I1 fibres. Since ρ(X) = ρ(X ′ ) by construction, X has Mordell-Weil rank r ≥ 15.
Again we have r = 15 in general.
   Within this three-dimensional family, it remains to single out a member with
ρ = 17. Kloosterman achieved this as follows: he first determined a surface (over
Q) where by means of good reduction mod p, the Lefschetz fixed point formula
implied ρ ≤ 18 after point counting over Fq for q = p, p2 , p3 ; then he compared
the reduction modulo another good prime q to prove ρ = 17 by an extension of
a technique pioneered by van Luijk in [116] (related to the Tate conjecture, see
14.6).

13.10. Explicit Mordell-Weil lattices. Sometimes it is even possible to deter-
mine the Mordell-Weil lattices abstractly or in terms of generators. For the base
changes X (n) of Inose’s pencil, this was achieved in [99].
   Kloosterman’s example above initiates a little detour to yet another area: sym-
plectic automorphisms of K3 surfaces, i.e. automophisms that leave the holomor-
phic two-form invariant. In consequence, the desingularisation of the quotient is
again a K3 surface. Recall that we have seen one example in form of Nikulin
involutions.
   Symplectic automorphism groups G on K3 surfaces X have been classified
completely starting with Nikulin for the abelian case [61]. One crucial property
is that the transcendental lattice T(X) is G-invariant. Lattice theoretically this
has the following effect. Let ΩG be defined as orthogonal complement
                         ΩG = (H 2 (X, Z)G )⊥ ⊂ H 2 (X, Z).
Then ΩG is in fact a primitive negative-definite sublattice of NS(X) that does not
depend on X. To compute ΩG , it thus suffices to work with one particular K3
surface X. In practice, it is often convenient to work with elliptic K3 surfaces since
here we have several means of prooducing symplectic automorphisms: notably
as quotients by translation by torsion sections and by base change (possibly
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 79

composed with the hyperelliptic involution). This approach has been pursued
very successfully by Garbagnati and Sarti [26].
   Returning to Kloosterman’s example above, it has the dihedral group on four
elements, D4 , as group of symplectic automorphisms. In [25] Garbagnati deter-
mined ΩD4 explicitly. For the general member of Kloosterman’s family, it follows
that MWL ∼ = ΩD4 (−1).

13.11. Mordell-Weil rank in characteristic p. The corresponding MW rank
problem in positive characteristic can be approached by similar methods. For
instance, the Kummer construction from Example 12.6 is well-defined in any
odd characteristic p > 2. The major difference is the occurence of supersingular
K3 surfaces, but the Picard number is expressed by the same formula as in
characteristic zero:
(30)        ρ(Km(E × E ′ )) = 18 + rank(Hom(E, E ′ )) ∈ {18, 19, 20, 22}.
Note that over F̄p , the Tate conjecture predicts an even parity of the Picard
number (cf. 14.6). Hence ρ = 19 cannot occur over F̄p .
   In fact, in characteristic p > 3 one can still consider Inose’s fibration (29)
with the same Picard number as the above Kummer surface. With Tables 5, 6
adjusted according to (30), we obtain elliptic K3 surfaces covering many MW
ranks in characteristic p > 3.
   In particular, X (5) and X (6) yield K3 surfaces with MW rank 20 over F̄p as
soon as there are at least two distinct supersingular elliptic curves over Fp (since
maximal MW rank requires all fibres to be irreducible, so E and E ′ cannot be
isomorphic). By the well-known formulas, the latter holds true for p = 11 and
p > 13.
Example 13.3. Choose E, E ′ with j-invariants 0 resp. 123 . Then
         X (5) :   y 2 = x3 + t (t10 + 1) and X (6) :   y 2 = x3 + t12 + 1.
These fibrations have MW rank 20 over F̄p if and only if both E and E ′ are
supersingular mod p, i.e. if p ≡ −1 mod 12.
   We note that all these supersingular K3 surfaces have Artin invariant σ = 1
(i.e. disc NS(X) = −p2 ). By a result of Ogus [71], such a K3 surface is unique
up to isomorphism. Through X (5) and X (6) , this K3 surface is endowed with
two distinct elliptic fibrations of maximal rank 20 for any pair of non-isomorphic
supersingular elliptic curves over Fp . In particular, the number of distinct MW
rank 20 fibrations grows with the characteristic (cf. [102]).

13.12. Mordell-Weil ranks of elliptic surfaces over Q. So far we have
mainly been concerned with Néron-Severi group and Mordell-Weil group of el-
liptic surfaces over algebraically closed ground fields k, thus regarding them as
purely geometric objects. As soon as we do not assume k to be algebraically
80                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

closed, arithmetic problems enter much more prominently. In fact, these prob-
lems can be very interesting in their own right, and often elliptic fibrations provide
a genuine tool to study these problems. We shall discuss a few of them throughout
the remainder of this section.
   Consider Kuwata’s and Kloosterman’s explicit examples of elliptic K3 surfaces
over C for any given Mordell-Weil rank. In any case, NS and MW are defined
over some finite extension of the ground field the details of which we ignored so
far. However, the analogous MW-rank question for fixed ground field is much
more delicate.
   Here we outline part of the solution to the problem over Q. The question of
Mordell-Weil rank 18 over Q was formulated by Shioda in [96]. Elkies gave a
negative answer in [19], [20]. His line of argument combined results specific to
singular K3 surfaces with lattice theory.
   By Cor. 6.13, Mordell-Weil rank 18 implies that an elliptic K3 surface is sin-
gular. Moreover the trivial lattice is only U, i.e. all fibres are irreducible. In
consequence, the Mordell-Weil lattice is even and integral, but has no roots.
This is a very special property, shared for instance by the Leech lattice.
   Thanks to the Shioda-Inose structure, any singular K3 surface X of discrim-
inant d < 0 can be defined over the ring class field H(d) by means of Inose’s
fibration (29). Here X may admit a model over some smaller field, but H(d) is
always preserved through its Galois action on NS(X) (cf. [82]). If the Mordell-
Weil rank over Q is 18, this implies that d has class number one, so |d| ≤ 163.
Because of the absence of roots, MWL would thus break the density records for
sphere packings in R18 . By gluing up to a Niemeier lattice as in 12.19, Elkies is
able to establish a contradiction.
   As for lower rank, Elkies found an elliptic K3 surface with Mordell-Weil rank
17 over Q (and necessarily ρ = 19) [20]. One can show that all intermediate ranks
are also attained over Q.
13.13. Modularity. Modularity usually refers to varieties over Q. Here one asks
for a relation to modular forms through the zeta function or L-series. For a sin-
gular K3 surfaces, Inose’s fibration (29) defines a model over the ring class field
H(d). In 13.12, we have reviewed an obstruction to descending X to smaller
number fields: the Galois action on the Néron-Severi group. On singular abelian
surfaces, there is a similar, but stronger obstruction to the corresponding problem
stemming from the Galois representation of H 1 (A) (cf. [23, Lemma 6]). For sin-
gular K3 surfaces, lattice theory imposes another substantially weaker condition
related to the genus of the transcendental lattice (cf. [88], [81]).
   Specifically, we can ask for singular K3 surfaces over Q. By [81], this requires
that the genus of T(X) consists of a single class; thus we are concerned with
imaginary quadratic fields of class group exponent two. Over some extension, the
zeta functions is expressed through particular Hecke characters by [103, Thm. 6].
Over Q, this relation specialises to classical modularity by a result of Livné:
                               ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                 81

Theorem 13.4 (Livné [49]). Every singular K3 surface X over Q is modular:
the Galois representation on T(X) is associated to a Hecke eigenform of weight
3.
  This result can be viewed as one of the first higher-dimensional analogues of
the modularity of elliptic curves after Wiles [119]. The converse was recently
established by Elkies and Schütt:
Theorem 13.5 (Elkies, Schütt [23]). Every known Hecke eigenform of weight 3
with eigenvalues ap ∈ Z is associated to a singular K3 surface over Q.
  The solution was first reduced to a finite problem by a combination of a finite-
ness result of Weinberger for imaginary quadratic fields with class group exponent
two [118], and the classification of the above Hecke eigenforms up to twisting in
[80]. Then it remained to find singular K3 surfaces over Q for the 65 discrimi-
nants from Weinberger’s list. In support of exhibiting these surfaces, elliptic K3
surfaces enter through two key features:
  First parametrise suitable one- and two-dimensional families of elliptic K3 sur-
faces over Q with Picard number ρ ≥ 19 resp. 18. Essentially, this is achieved
through explicit calculations with extended Weierstrass forms and their discrim-
inant, as it suffices to consider families with NS spanned by the trivial lattice.
  Then determine a singular member of the family with additional section(s)
such that the discriminant equals some given d < 0. By the height formula (22),
the discriminant translates into information on the intersection behaviour of the
section(s). In particular, one can directly read off the fibre components that have
to be met by the section(s). Often these extra information reduce the complexity
enough as to facilitate an explicit computation of the singular member of the
family and the section(s).
13.14. Shimura curves. There is another reason to be interested in one-dimensional
families of (elliptic) K3 surfaces with ρ ≥ 19 as in the proof of Thm. 13.5: the
parametrising curve is always a modular curve or a Shimura curve associated to
a quaternion algebra over Q. In fact, as the explicit knowledge of Shimura curves
is still fairly limited, K3 families enable us to draw interesting consequences for
Shimura curves. This approach was pursued by Elkies in [22]; he derived explicit
defining equations and CM points of certain Shimura curves and also determined
the corresponding QM-abelian surfaces.
   The reason why K3 surfaces are easier to parametrise lies in the Néron-Severi
group: it has rank 19, so the level of the quaternion algebra (which gives the
discriminant of NS) is spread over substantially more divisor classes.
   In practice, Elkies in [22] pursues a similar approach as in 13.13: he deter-
mines a one-dimensional family of elliptic K3 surface with ρ ≥ 19 and given
discriminant; then he computes CM points along the lines of 13.13.
   The main step now consists in finding the corresponding abelian surfaces. This
can be achieved through a Shioda-Inose structure. Namely we need an elliptic
82                     MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

fibration with section and singular fibres of type II∗ and III∗ . Then we can apply
Kumar’s construction [41] to find the Igusa-Klebsch invariants of a family of genus
2-curves. The Jacobians of these curves yield the corresponding abelian surfaces.
   In practice, it might actually not be so easy to parametrise the required elliptic
fibrations directly. However, often the K3 surfaces admit other fibrations which
are more readily found. By Prop. 12.10, it then suffices to identify perpendicular
divisors of type Ẽ7 and Ẽ8 in NS(X) and compute their linear systems. In [22],
Elkies achieves this in several steps. Here we treat a related example.
Example 13.6. Consider a K3 surface X given by Inose’s fibration (29) with two
II∗ fibres. In the intersection graph consisting of zero section and Ẽ8 ’s, we directly
identify a divisor of type D̃12 by omitting the vertices coresponding to the far
double components of the II∗ fibre. The graph is sketched in Figure 10.

                          r

             Ẽ8
                                                             ❍
            r      r      r      r      r      r      r      r
                                                               ❍❍
                                                                 ❍❢
                                                                ✟✟
                                                                  r
            r      r      r      r      r      r      r      ✟
                                                             r ✟    O
            Ẽ8
                          r


       Figure 10. An D̃16 divisor supported on the zero-section and
       components of the singular fibres

  By Prop. 12.10, X admits an elliptic fibration with I∗12 fibre and sections in-
duced by the omitted far components. By itself, this fibration might be not so
easy to parametrise. However, the fibration can be deduced directly from (29)
by choosing u = x/t2 as an elliptic parameter. One obtains the Weierstrass form
                   X:     y 2 = t2 u3 − 3 A t2 u + t (t2 − 2 B t + 1)
over k(u) in (t, y)-coordinates with I∗12 fibre at u = ∞ and two-torsion section
(0, 0).
13.15. Real multiplication abelian surfaces. Similar techniques can be ap-
plied to study abelian surfaces A  √ with real multiplication (RM): here an order
in a real quadratic field K = Q( D) embeds into the endomorphism ring of A.
A general RM abelian surface A has Picard number ρ(A) = 2, but only in the
very first cases the general A is known. Elkies and Kumar again argue with K3
surfaces: as in 13.14 the main idea is to exhibit a two-dimensional family of K3
surfaces with ρ ≥ 18 and the right discriminant. Then compute an appropri-
ate elliptic fibration to find the Shioda-Inose structure. Elkies reported on some
results for D = 33, 53 in [21].
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  83

13.16. Rational points. Let X be a variety over a number field K (or over the
function field of a curve). The rational points are said to be potentially dense
on X if there is some finite extension K ′ /K such that X(K ′ ) is dense. Behind
this notion stands the expectation that potential density should be a geometric
property, depending only on the canonical class KX . Thanks to Faltings’ theorem
[24], this concept applies to curves: potential density holds true exactly for curves
of genus zero and one.
   The same is true for surfaces with KX negative: Over a finite extension, they
are all rational. On the other hand, the Lang-Bombieri conjecture rules out
potential density for projective varieties of general type.
   Among surfaces with KX ≡ 0, potential density has been proved for abelian
and Enriques surfaces. In this context, elliptic fibrations enter naturally since
positive Mordell-Weil rank over K implies the density of K-rational points. In
this spirit, a result by Bogomolov and Tschinkel covers a great range of K3
surfaces [8] – among them all elliptic K3 surfaces:
Theorem 13.7 (Bogomolov, Tschinkel). Let X be a K3 surface over a number
field. Assume that X has an elliptic fibration or infinite automorphism group.
Then the rational points are potentially dense on X.
  Note that the elliptic fibration of the theorem is not required to have a section.
In consequence, Cor. 12.9 implies that every K3 surface over some number field
with ρ ≥ 5 shares the property of potential density.
13.17. Hasse principle. The question of rational points is closely related to the
Hasse principle: If a variety X has a Q-rational point, then it has Qv -rational
points at every place v. Hence the set of adelic points X(A) is nonempty. The
converse implication is known as the Hasse principle:
                                         ?
                           X(A) 6= ∅ =⇒ X(Q) 6= ∅.
The Hasse principle holds for conics, but is not true in general. In 1970, Manin
[51] discovered that the failure of the Hasse principle can often be explained
through the Brauer group Br(X). He defined a subset X(A)Br ⊂ X(A) that
contains X(Q), but can be empty even if X(A) is not. This case is referred to as
Brauer-Manin obstruction.
   For K3 surfaces, it is an open problem whether the Brauer-Manin obstruction
is the only obstruction to the Hasse principle. In the context of elliptic surfaces
(not necessarily with section), Colliot-Thélène, Skorobogatov and Swinnerton-
Dyer pioneered an elaborate technique encompassing these problems [11]. There
are direct applications to K3 surfaces; subject to standard hypotheses, they imply
the existence of rational points on certain K3 surfaces (cf. [11, pp. 585, 625/626]).
   The techniques of [11] apply not only to K3 surfaces, but to several types of
surfaces endowed with an elliptic fibration. They have been further devolped by
Wittenberg in [120].
84                   MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

                        14. Ranks of elliptic curves
   In this section, we shall give a brief discussion of possible Mordell-Weil ranks
of elliptic surfaces. In order for this problem to make sense, the base curve C has
to be fixed; otherwise one can always apply a base change to a curve of higher
genus to split some multisection and thus increase the MW rank. Here we will
almost exclusively be concerned with the case C ∼   = P1 .
14.1. Noether-Lefschetz loci. Before discussing Mordell-Weil ranks, we have
to look into Picard numbers in generality. Let S → P1 denote an elliptic surface
with section over C. Upon fixing the arithmetic genus χ(S) = n, the moduli
space of these surfaces has dimension 10 n − 2 by inspection of a globally minimal
Weierstrass form as in 4.8: the degrees 4 n + 1 resp. 6 n + 1 of a4 and a6 minus 4
normalisations by Möbius transformations and scaling. Here we are not concerned
with rational elliptic surfaces, since then always ρ = 10. Hence we shall assume
that χ(S) > 1.
   Recall that NS(S) is generated by horizontal and vertical divisors by Cor. 6.13.
Hence an increase of the Picard number within a family of elliptic surfaces can
be achieved by two means:
      • by degenerating the singular fibres in order to produce an additional fibre
        component;
      • by forcing an additional, i.e. independent section.
From the discriminant ∆, it is visible that the first degeneration causes just one
condition on the parameters of the family: the degenerate surfaces ought to live
in one-dimensional subspaces of the moduli space. Kloosterman gave a rigorous
proof of this fact in [34] based on the model as hypersurface in weighted projective
space from 4.10.
Theorem 14.1. Consider non-isotrivial complex elliptic surfaces over P1 with
section and fixed arithmetic genus χ ≥ 2. The surfaces with Picard number
ρ ≥ r (r ≥ 2) have (10 χ − r)-dimensional Noether-Lefschetz locus
  To some extent, isotrivial elliptic surfaces can be dealt with as well (cf. [34,
Cor. 1.2]). The K3 case of χ = 2 follows from the period map (12.4). For r = 3,
the result was previously proven by Cox [14] as we shall discuss in the next
section.

14.2. Section heuristics. While the above fibre degeneration argument seems
to work in any characteristic, the problem of additional sections is more subtle;
in particular, it depends on the characteristic.
   First we discuss a heuristic argument: Let P = (X(t), Y (t)) be an integral
section on an integral model of the elliptic surface S → P1 in the notion of
11.17. Then X(t) has degree 2χ and deg(Y (t)) = 3χ in general. In total, these
polynomials have 5χ + 2 coefficients; on the other hand, the Weierstrass form has
                                 ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                    85

degree 6χ in t. Hence there are (χ − 1) more equations (at ti , i = 0, . . . , 6 χ) than
coefficients available. These heuristics suggest that increasing the Mordell-Weil
rank by one should cost χ − 1 moduli dimensions.
  So far these arguments have been made explicit only in the first case by Cox
[14]:
Theorem 14.2. Consider non-isotrivial complex elliptic surfaces over P1 with
section and fixed arithmetic genus χ ≥ 2. The surfaces with Mordell-Weil rank
≥ 1 have (9 χ − 1)-dimensional moduli.
  For higher MW rank. Thm. 14.1 gives an upper bound for the dimension of the
Noether-Lefschetz locus; however this bound cannot be expected to be optimal,
as suggested by Thm. 14.2.
14.3. Mordell-Weil rank over C. The above heuristics show why it is hard
to produce elliptic surfaces of high MW rank. At this point, the main hope
seemingly consists in finding a canonical (geometric) construction as in 13.8. In
particular, it is unclear whether Mordell-Weil ranks of complex elliptic surfaces
over P1 can be arbitrary large:
Question 14.3. Is there an upper bound for the Mordell-Weil ranks of complex
elliptic surfaces over P1 ?
  One should point out that Lapin once claimed that the MW rank is unbounded
[48]. However, some gaps were discovered in his proof (cf. [78]), so the question
remains open.
14.4. To our knowledge, the current record for Mordell-Weil ranks of complex
elliptic surfaces over P1 is 68. it is attained by some of the isotrivial elliptic
surfaces
(31)                   S:    y 2 = x3 + tm + 1    (m ∈ N).
Theorem 14.4 (Shioda (1991)). The elliptic surface S over C has Mordell-Weil
rank r ≤ 68. Moreover
                          r = 68 ⇐⇒ m ≡ 0          mod 360.
   The proof relies on the fact that S is a Delsarte surface, i.e. covered by a
Fermat surface. Since the Lefschetz number λ(S) is a birational invariant, it can
be computed from the Galois cover. Then b2 (S) = λ(S) + ρ(S) gives the Picard
number. The Mordell-Weil rank is easily obtained from Cor. 6.13 since there are
no reducible fibres except possibly at ∞.
   This argument was exhibited in detail by Shioda in [92] where the previous rank
record of 56 was achieved by another class of Delsarte elliptic surfaces which is
non-isotrivial (i.e. with non-constant j-invariant).
   The lattice structure of the Mordell-Weil lattice for the elliptic surface (31)
for any m has been determined by Usui [115]. For example, in case r = 68, its
determinant is equal to 2136 3102 540 .
86                    MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

14.5. Mordell-Weil ranks in positive characteristic. The approach through
Delsarte surfaces is also very useful in positive characteristic. In fact, it enables
us to show that MW-ranks are not bounded.
   The reason for this lies in unirationality. Namely, by [29] the Fermat surface
of degree n is unirational in charateristic p if and only if
                           ∃ν ∈ N :     pν ≡ −1 mod n.
Since unirationality implies supersingularity (b2 = ρ), one can thus construct
supersingular elliptic surfaces in abundance: by controlling the trivial lattice,
one can achieve arbitrarily large MW ranks. For instance, the elliptic surface in
(31) is unirational in characteristic p if p ≡ −1 mod 3m (or if this holds for some
power of p).
  The first proof that MW-ranks are unbounded in any positive characteristic
goes back to Tate and Shafarevich [114] who used supersingular Fermat curves.
Their proof is based on the validity of the Tate conjecture of abelian varieties
over finite fields [112] that we will briefly discuss below in 14.6. In particular, the
construction of Tate and Shafarevich works over fixed finite fields. This contrasts
with the geometric reasoning in [29] over an algebraically closed field.
  Mordell-Weil lattices in positive characteristic had a great impact on the sphere
packing problem. Namely they enabled Elkies and one of us independently to
derive lattices with greater density than previously known (cf. [12, pp. xviii-xxii],
[18], [94]).
14.6. Tate conjecture. Another feature of positive characteristic is that the
Noether-Lefschetz loci behave in a different way. This observation can be easily
checked for explicit examples; in general it depends on the validity of the Tate
conjecture.
   The Tate conjecture [111] states that over a finite field Fq , the Picard number
of an algebraic surface X can be read off from the induced action of the Frobe-
nius morphism Frobq on H 2 (X). Namely, consider the subgroup N of NS(X)
generated by divisor class defined over Fq . Conjecturally, the rank of N equals
the multiplicity of q as an eigenvalue of Frob∗q on H 2 (X) (for a suitable étale co-
homology with ℓ-adic coefficients). The Tate conjecture is only known for specific
classes of surfaces, such as abelian surfaces and products of curves [112], elliptic
K3 surfaces with section [2] and Fermat surfaces [29].
   One particular consequence of the Tate conjecture concerns the (geometric)
Picard number of X (i.e. over F̄q ): it equals the number of eigenvalues of Frob∗q
which have the shape q times a root of unity. By the Weil conjectures, all other
eigenvalues come in complex conjugate pairs. Hence the Tate conjecture implies
that the difference b2 (X) − ρ(X̄) has even parity. In other words, divisors come
always in pairs on surfaces over finite fields!
   The Tate conjecture has the following impact on an elliptic surfaces over F̄q :
Suppose we degenerate or specialise a given surface over F̄q so that there is an
                                ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                  87

additional fibre component (or section). Then the Tate conjecture forces the
occurrence of another independent divisor. Generally this divisor will appear as
an independent section.
14.7. Specialisation. When working over number fields, there is one particular
reason to be interested in elliptic surfaces with high Mordell-Weil rank: spe-
cialisation yields elliptic curves with high rank. Namely, by a result of Néron
and Silverman [105], the Mordell-Weil group of the general member in a one-
dimensional family of abelian varieties injects into the Mordell-Weil groups of
the specialisations except at finitely many places over any given (finite) number
field.
   Applied to the elliptic K3 surface of MW rank 17 mentioned in 13.12, special-
isation yields infinitely many elliptic curves over Q with rank at least 17. This
construction was accelerated by Elkies in [19] as follows. First he exhibited a base
change from P1 to an elliptic curves E of positive rank such that the MW rank
increased to 18. Then he studied the fibres of the base changed elliptic surface
over Q – generally elliptic curves of rank at least 18 over Q. Among them, Elkies
found one particular fibre that attains the current record of an elliptic curve over
Q with rank at least 28.
   In a way, this new record curve puts an interesting twist to the previous achieve-
ments: the first record curves were based on geometric considerations, in partic-
ular cubic pencils and rational elliptic surfaces. This approach culminated in the
famous work of Néron (1954) to construct infinitely many elliptic curves over Q
of rank at least 11 (cf. Serre [85]). Néron’s technique was later clarified with the
method of Mordell-Weil lattices in [95]. Then, starting from an elliptic curve over
Q(t) of rank at least 12 by Mestre and others, extensive computer searches played
the dominant role in subsequent years, leading to the previous record curves of
rank (at least) 24. It is now with Elkies’ work that geometric arguments are
reclaiming their prominent role.
   Similar techniques have been pursued for elliptic curves over Q with fixed
torsion subgroup (cf. [20]). Note that here the Mordell-Weil ranks of the elliptic
surfaces are much smaller compared to Picard number and Euler number of the
elliptic surface, since the torsion sections force reducible singular fibres by 7.7.
Acknowledgements. We thank the organisers of the conference “Algebraic Ge-
ometry in East Asia” for inviting us to participate in this fruitful meeting and
contribute this paper to the proceedings. The first author is indepted to I. Shi-
mada for supporting and arranging his visit.
  Most of this paper was written while the first author held a position at Uni-
versity of Copenhagen, and the first draft was almost finished during a visit of
the second author. We are grateful to the Department of Mathematics for their
support.
  We would like to express our gratitude to all our colleagues for discussions
and collaborations throughout the years. Particular thanks go to the students
88                      MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

who attended our lectures on the subject of this survey. It was on one of these
occasions that we first met in Milano in 2006, and we would like to take this
opportunity to thank B. van Geemen for making this initial meeting possible.
   We are grateful to I. Dolgachev, R. Kloosterman, D. Lorenzini, and H. Partsch
for their helpful comments. Our thanks go to the referee for many comments
that helped us improve the paper.

                                        References
  [1] Artin, M.: Supersingular K3 surfaces, Ann. scient. Éc. Norm. Sup. (4) 7 (1974), 543–568.
  [2] Artin, M., Swinnerton-Dyer, P.: The Shafarevich-Tate conjecture for pencils of elliptic
      curves on K3 surfaces, Invent. Math. 20 (1973), 249–266.
  [3] Barth, W., Peters, C.: Automorphisms of Enriques surfaces, Invent. Math. 73 (1983),
      no. 3, 383–411.
  [4] Barth, W., Hulek, K., Peters, C., van de Ven, A.: Compact complex surfaces. Second
      edition, Erg. der Math. und ihrer Grenzgebiete, 3. Folge, Band 4. Springer (2004), Berlin.
  [5] Beauville, A.: Complex algebraic surfaces. Second edition. LMS Student Texts, 34. Cam-
      bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996
  [6] Beauville, A.: Les familles stables de courbes elliptiques sur P1 admettant quatre fibres
      singuliéres, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 294 (1982), 657–660.
  [7] Beukers, F., Montanus, H.: Explicit calculation of elliptic fibrations of K3-surfaces and
      their Belyi-maps, Number theory and polynomials, 33–51, London Math. Soc. Lect. Note
      Ser. 352, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2008.
  [8] Bogomolov, F. A., Tschinkel, Y: Density of rational points on elliptic K3 surfaces, Asian
      J. Math. 4 (2000), no. 2, 351–368.
  [9] Bombieri, E., Mumford, D.: Enriques’ classification of surfaces in char. p. II-III, in:
      Baily, W. L. Jr., Shioda, T. (eds.), Complex analysis and algebraic geometry, Iwanami
      Shoten, Tokyo (1977) 23–42; Invent. Math. 35 (1976), 197–232.
 [10] Cassels, J. W. S.: Lectures on Elliptic Curves, London Math. Soc. Student texts 24,
      Cambr. Univ. Press (1991).
 [11] Colliot-Thélène, J.-L., Skorobogatov, A. N., Swinnerton-Dyer, P.: Hasse principle for
      pencils of curves of genus one whose Jacobians have rational 2-division points, In-
      vent. Math. 134 (1998), no. 3, 579–650.
 [12] Conway, J. H., Sloane, N. J. A.: Sphere packings, lattices and groups, Grundlehren der
      Mathematischen Wissenschaften 290, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag, 1993.
 [13] Cox, D. A.: Mordell Weil groups of elliptic curves over C(t) with pg = 0 or 1, Duke
      Math. J. 49 (1982), no. 3, 677–689.
 [14] Cox, D. A.: The Noether-Lefschetz locus of regular elliptic surfaces with section and
      pg ≥ 2, Amer. J. Math. 112 (1990), no. 2, 289–329.
 [15] Cossec, F. R., Dolgachev, I. V.: Enriques surfaces. I. Progress in Math. 76. Birkhäuser
      (1989).
 [16] Deligne, P.: Formes modulaires et représentations ℓ-adiques, in: Sém. Bourbaki 1968/69,
      no. 355 (Lect. Notes in Math. 179), Springer-Verlag (1971), 139–172.
 [17] Deligne, P.: Relèvement des surfaces K3 en caractéristique nulle, in: Algebraic surfaces
      (Orsay, 1976–78), Lect. Notes in Math. 868 (1981), 58–79.
 [18] Elkies, N. D.: Mordell-Weil lattices in characteristic 2, I. Construction and first proper-
      ties, Int. Math. Res. Not. 1994, no. 8, 343–361; II. The Leech lattice as a Mordell-Weil
      lattice, Inv. Math. 128 (1997), 1–8; III. A Mordell-Weil lattice of rank 128, Exp. Math. 10
      (2001), no. 3, 467-473.
                                     ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                           89

[19] Elkies, N. D.: The maximal Mordell-Weil rank of an elliptic K3 surface over Q(t), talk at
     conference on Birational Automorphisms of Compact Complex Manifolds and Dynamical
     Systems at Nagoya University, Aug 28, 2007.
[20] Elkies, N. D.: Three lectures on elliptic surfaces and curves of high rank, preprint(2007),
     arXiv: 0709.2908.
[21] Elkies, N. D.: Real Multiplication abelian varieties over Q, preprint (2007).
[22] Elkies, N. D.: Shimura Curve Computations Via K3 Surfaces of NS-Rank at Least 19,
     Lect. Notes in Comp. Sci. 5011 (ANTS VIII, 2008), Springer (2008), 196–211.
[23] Elkies, N. D., Schütt, M.: Modular forms and K3 surfaces, preprint (2008), arXiv:
     0809.0830.
[24] Faltings, G.: Endlichkeitssätze für abelsche Varietäten über Zahlkörpern, Invent. Math. 73
     (1983), no. 3, 349–366.
[25] Garbagnati, A.: Elliptic K3 surfaces with abelian and dihedral groups of symplectic auto-
     morphisms, preprint (2009), arXiv: 0904.1519.
[26] Garbagnati, A., Sarti, A.: Elliptic fibrations and symplectic automorphisms on K3 sur-
     faces, Comm. in Algebra 37 (2009), 1-31.
[27] Inose, H.: Defining equations of singular K3 surfaces and a notion of isogeny, in: Pro-
     ceedings of the International Symposium on Algebraic Geometry (Kyoto Univ., Kyoto,
     1977), Kinokuniya Book Store, Tokyo (1978), 495–502.
[28] Ito, H.: On extremal elliptic surfaces in characteristic 2 and 3, Hiroshima Math. J. 32
     (2002), pp. 179–188.
[29] Katsura, T., Shioda, T.: On Fermat varieties, Tohoku Math. J. (2) 31 (1979), no. 1,
     97–115.
[30] Katz, N. M., Mazur, Barry: Arithmetic moduli of elliptic curves. Annals of Mathematics
     Studies 108. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1985.
[31] Keum, J.-H.: A note on elliptic K3 surfaces, Trans. AMS 352 (1999), no. 5, 2077–2086.
[32] Kloosterman, R.: Extremal elliptic surfaces and infinitesimal Torelli, Michigan
     Math. J. 52 (2004), 141–161.
[33] Kloosterman, R.:       Elliptic K3 surfaces with geometric Mordell-Weil rank 15,
     Canad. Math. Bull. 50 (2007), no. 2, 215–226.
[34] Kloosterman, R.: Higher Noether-Lefschetz loci of elliptic surfaces, J. Differential
     Geom. 76 (2007), 293–316.
[35] Kneser, M.: Klassenzahlen indefiniter quadratischer Formen in drei oder mehr Vernder-
     lichen, Arch. Math. 7 (1956), 323–332.
[36] Kneser, M.: Klassenzahlen definiter quadratischer Formen, Arch. Math. 8 (1957), 241–
     250.
[37] Kodaira, K.: On compact analytic surfaces I-III, Ann. of Math., 71 (1960), 111–152; 77
     (1963), 563–626; 78 (1963), 1–40.
[38] Kodaira, K.: On the structure of compact complex analytic surfaces I, Amer. J. Math. 86
     (1964), 751–798.
[39] S. Kondō, Automorphisms of algebraic K3 surfaces which act trivially on Picard groups,
     J. Math. Soc. Japan, 44, No. 1 (1992), 75–98.
[40] Kulikov, V. S.: Degenerations of K3-surfaces and Enriques surfaces, Math. USSR Izv. 11
     (1977) 957–989.
[41] Kumar, A.: K3 Surfaces Associated with Curves of Genus Two, Int. Math. Res. Notices
     Vol. 2008.
[42] Kuwata, M.:         Elliptic K3 surfaces with given Mordell-Weil rank, Com-
     ment. Math. Univ. St. Pauli 49 (2000), no. 1, 91–100.
90                      MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

 [43] Kuwata, M., Shioda, T.: Elliptic parameters and defining equations for elliptic fibra-
      tions on a Kummer surface, in: Algebraic geometry in East Asia (Hanoi 2005), 177–215,
      Adv. Stud. Pure Math. 50, Math. Soc. Japan, Tokyo, 2008.
 [44] Lando, S. K., Zvonkin, A. K.: Graphs on surfaces and their applications, Encyclopaedia
      of Mathematical Sciences 141. Low-Dimensional Topology, II. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
      2004.
 [45] Lang, S.: Fundamentals of Diophantine Geometry. Springer (1983).
 [46] Lang, W.: Extremal rational elliptic surfaces in characteristic p. I: Beauville surfaces,
      Math. Z. 207 (1991), 429–437.
 [47] Lang, W.: Extremal rational elliptic surfaces in characteristic p. II: Surfaces with three
      or fewer singular fibers, Ark. Math. 32 (1994), 423–448.
 [48] Lapin, A. I.: Subfields of hyperelliptic fields, Izv. Akad. Nauk. SSSR Ser. Mat. 28 (1964),
      953–988; Transl. AMS 69 (1968), 204-240.
 [49] Livné, R.: Motivic orthogonal two-dimensional representations of Gal(Q/Q), Israel J. of
      Math. 92 (1995), 149–156.
 [50] Liu, Q., Lorenzini, D., Raynaud, M.: Néron models, Lie algebras, and reduction of curves
      of genus one, Invent. Math. 157 (2004), no. 3, 455–518.
 [51] Manin, Y. I.: Le groupe de Brauer-Grothendieck en géométrie diophantienne, Actes du
      Congrès International des Mathématiciens (Nice, 1970), Tome 1, Gauthier-Villars (1971),
      401–411.
 [52] Mazur, B.:       Modular curves and the Eisenstein ideal, Inst. Hautes Études
      Sci. Publ. Math. 47 (1977), 33–186.
 [53] Miranda, R.: The basic theory of elliptic surfaces, Dottorato di ricerca in matematica,
      ETS Editrice, Pisa (1989).
 [54] Miranda, R., Persson, U.: On Extremal Rational Elliptic Surfaces, Math. Z. 193 (1986),
      537–558.
 [55] Miranda, R., Persson, U.: Configurations of In Fibers on Elliptic K3 surfaces,
      Math. Z. 201 (1989), 339–361.
 [56] Miyamoto, R., Top, J.: Reduction of Elliptic Curves in Equal Characteristic,
      Canad. Math. Bull. 48 (2005), 428–444.
 [57] Morrison, D. R.: On K3 surfaces with large Picard number, Invent. Math. 75 (1984),
      no. 1, 105–121.
 [58] Mumford, D.: Lectures on Curves on an Algebraic Surface, Princeton Univ. Press (1966).
 [59] Néron, A: Modèles minimaux des variétés abéliennes sur les corps locaux et globaux,
      Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. No. 21 (1964).
 [60] Niemeier, H.-V.: Definite quadratische Formen der Dimension 24 und Diskriminante 1,
      J. Number Theory 5 (1973), 142–178.
 [61] Nikulin, V. V.: Finite groups of automorphisms of Khlerian K3 surfaces, Trans. Moscow
      Math. Soc. 38 (1980), 71–135.
 [62] Nikulin, V. V.: Integral symmetric bilinear forms and some of their applications,
      Math. USSR Izv. 14, No. 1 (1980), 103–167.
 [63] Nishiyama, K.-I.: The Jacobian fibrations on some K3 surfaces and their Mordell-Weil
      groups, Japan. J. Math. 22 (1996), 293–347.
 [64] Nishiyama, K.-I.: A remark on Jacobian fibrations on K3 surfaces, Saitama Math. J. 15
      (1997), 67–71.
 [65] Nori, M., On certain elliptic surfaces with maximal Picard number, Topology 24 (1985),
      no. 2, 175–186
                                      ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                            91

[66] Nygaard, N. O.: The Torelli theorem for ordinary K3 surfaces over finite fields, in: Arith-
     metic and geometry, Vol. I, 267–276, Progr. Math. 35, Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA,
     1983.
[67] Nygaard, N. O.: The Tate conjecture for ordinary K3 surfaces over finite fields, In-
     vent. Math. 74 (1983), no. 2, 213–237.
[68] Ogg, A.: Elliptic curves and wild ramification, Amer. J. Math. 89 (1967), 1–21.
[69] Oguiso, K,: On Jacobian fibrations on the Kummer surfaces of the product of nonisoge-
     nous elliptic curves, J. Math. Soc. Japan 41 (1989), no. 4, 651–680.
[70] Oguiso, K., Shioda, T.: The Mordell–Weil lattice of a rational elliptic surface, Com-
     ment. Math. Univ. St. Pauli 40 (1991), 83–99.
[71] Ogus, A.: Supersingular K3 crystals, Journées de Géométrie Algébrique de Rennes
     (Rennes 1978), Vol. II, 3–86, Astérisque 64, Soc. Math. France, Paris, 1979.
[72] Ogus, A.: A crystalline Torelli theorem for supersingular K3 surfaces, in: Arithmetic and
     geometry, Vol. II, 361–394, Progr. Math. 36, Birkhuser Boston, Boston, MA, 1983.
[73] Pesenti, J., Szpiro, L.: Inégalité du discriminant pour les pinceaux elliptiques à réductions
     quelconques, Compositio Math. 120 (2000), no. 1, 83–117.
[74] Piatetski-Shapiro , I. I., Shafarevich, I. R.: Torelli’s theorem for algebraic surfaces of type
     K3, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 35 (1971), 530–572.
[75] Saitō, M.-H.: On the infinitesimal Torelli problem of elliptic surfaces, J. Math. Kyoto
     Univ. 23 (1983), 441–460.
[76] Saito, T.: Conductor, discriminant, and the Noether formula of arithmetic surfaces, Duke
     Math. J. 57 (1988), no. 1, 151–173.
[77] Schmickler-Hirzebruch, U.: Elliptische Flächen über P1 C mit drei Ausnahmefasern und
     die hypergeometrische Differentialgleichung, Schriftreihe des Mathematischen Instituts
     der Universität Münster (1985).
[78] Schoen, C.: Bounds for rational points on twists of constant hyperelliptic curves, J. reine
     angew. Math. 411 (1990), 196–204.
[79] Schütt, M.: The maximal singular fibres of elliptic K3 surfaces, Arch. Math. 87, Nr. 4
     (2006), 309–319.
[80] Schütt, M.: CM newforms with rational coefficients, Ramanujan J. 19 (2009), 187–205.
[81] Schütt, M.: Fields of definition of singular K3 surfaces, Communications in Number
     Theory and Physics 1, 2 (2007), 307–321.
[82] Schütt, M.: K3 surfaces with Picard rank 20 over Q, Algebra & Number Theory 4 (2010),
     no. 3, 335–356.
[83] Schütt, M., Schweizer, A.: Davenport-Stothers inequalities and elliptic surfaces in positive
     characteristic, Quarterly J. Math. 59 (2008), 499–522.
[84] Schütt, M., Schweizer, A.: On the uniqueness of elliptic K3 surfaces with maximal singular
     fibre, preprint (2007), arXiv: 0712.3873.
[85] Serre, J.-P.: Lectures on the Mordell-Weil Theorem. Viehweg (1989).
[86] Shafarevich, I. R: Basic algebraic geometry, Second edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994.
[87] Shimada, I: On elliptic K3 surfaces, Michigan Math. J. 47 (2000), no. 3, 423–446.
[88] Shimada, I.: Transcendental lattices and supersingular reduction lattices of a singular K3
     surface, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 361 (2009), 909–949.
[89] Shimada, I., Zhang, D. Q.: Classification of extremal elliptic K3 surfaces and fundamental
     groups of open K3 surfaces, Nagoya Math. J. 161 (2001), 23–54.
[90] Shimura, G.: Introduction to the arithmetic theory of automorphic functions, Iwanami
     Shoten & Princeton University Press (1971).
[91] Shioda, T.: On elliptic modular surfaces, J. Math. Soc. Japan 24 (1972), 20–59.
[92] Shioda, T.: An explicit algorithm for computing the Picard number of certain algebraic
     surfaces, Amer. J. Math. 108, No. 2 (1986), 415–432.
92                       MATTHIAS SCHÜTT AND TETSUJI SHIODA

 [93] Shioda, T.: On the Mordell-Weil lattices, Comm. Math. Univ. St. Pauli 39 (1990), 211–
      240.
 [94] Shioda, T.: Mordell-Weil lattices and sphere packings, Amer. J. Math. 113 (1991), 931–
      948.
 [95] Shioda, T.: An infinite family of elliptiic curves over Q with large rank via Néron’s
      method, Invent. math. 106 (1991), 109–119.
 [96] Shioda, T.: On the ranks of elliptic curves over Q(t) arising from K3 surfaces,
      Comm. Math. Univ. St. Pauli 43 (1994), 117–120.
 [97] Shioda, T.: The elliptic K3 surfaces with a maximal singular fibre, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris,
      Ser. I, 337 (2003), 461–466.
 [98] Shioda, T.:         Kummer sandwich theorem of certain elliptic K3 surfaces,
      Proc. Japan Acad. 82, Ser. A (2006), 137–140.
 [99] Shioda, T: K3 surfaces and sphere packings, J. Math. Soc. Japan 60 (2008), 1083–1105.
[100] Shioda, T.:        The abc-theorem, Davenport’s inequality and elliptic surfaces,
      Proc. Jap. Acad. 84, Ser. A, (2008), 51–56.
[101] Shioda, T.: Gröbner Basis, Mordell-Weil Lattices and Deformation of Singularities,
      preprint (2009).
[102] Shioda, T.: Elliptic fibrations of maximal rank on supersingular K3 surfaces, in prepara-
      tion.
[103] Shioda, T., Inose, H.: On Singular K3 Surfaces, in: Baily, W. L. Jr., Shioda, T. (eds.),
      Complex analysis and algebraic geometry, Iwanami Shoten, Tokyo (1977), 119–136.
[104] Shioda, T., Mitani, N.: Singular abelian surfaces and binary quadratic forms, in: Classi-
      fication of algebraic varieties and compact complex manifolds, Lect. Notes in Math. 412
      (1974), 259–287.
[105] Silverman, Joseph H.: Heights and the specialization map for families of abelian varieties,
      J. Reine Angew. Math. 342 (1983), 197–211.
[106] Silverman, J. H.: The arithmetic of elliptic curves. Graduate Texts in Math. 106, Springer
      (1986).
[107] Silverman, J. H.: Advanced Topics in the Arithmetic of Elliptic Curves. Graduate Texts
      in Math. 151, Springer (1994).
[108] Siu, Y. T.: Every K3 surface is Kähler, Invent. Math. 73 (1983), no. 1, 139–150.
[109] Sterk, H.: Finiteness results for algebraic K3 surfaces, Math. Z. 189 (1985), no. 4, 507–
      513.
[110] Szydlo, M.: Elliptic fibers over non-perfect residue fields, J. Number Theory 104 (2004),
      no. 1, 75–99.
[111] Tate, J.: Algebraic cycles and poles of zeta functions, in: Arithmetical Algebraic Geometry
      (Proc. Conf. Purdue Univ., 1963), 93–110, Harper & Row (1965).
[112] Tate, J.: Endomorphisms of abelian varieties over finite fields, Invent. Math. 2 (1966),
      134–144.
[113] Tate, J.: Algorithm for determining the type of a singular fibre in an elliptic pencil, in:
      Modular functions of one variable IV (Antwerpen 1972), Lect. Notes in Math. 476 (1975),
      33–52.
[114] Tate, J., Shafarevich, I. R.: The rank of elliptic curves, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 175
      (1967), 770–773.
[115] Usui, H.: On the Mordell-Weil lattice of the elliptic curve y 2 = x3 + tm + 1, I, II, III, IV,
      Comm. Math. Univ. St. Pauli 49 (2000), 71–78, 50 (2001), 65–87, 55 (2006), 173–194,
      57 (2008), 23–63.
[116] van Luijk, R.: K3 surfaces with Picard number one and infinitely many rational points,
      Algebra Number Theory 1 (2007), no. 1, 1–15.
                                   ELLIPTIC SURFACES                                       93

[117] Vinberg, È. B.: The two most algebraic K3 surfaces, Math. Ann. 265 (1983), no. 1, 1–21.
[118] Weinberger, P. J.: Exponents of the class groups of complex quadratic fields, Acta
      Arith. 22 (1973), 117–124.
[119] Wiles, A.: Modular elliptic curves and Fermat’s Last Theorem, Ann. Math. (2) 141, No. 3
      (1995), 443–551.
[120] Wittenberg, O.: Intersections de deux quadriques et pinceaux de courbes de genre 1,
      Lect. Notes in Math 1901. Springer, Berlin, 2007.

  Institut für Algebraische Geometrie, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Welfen-
garten 1, 30167 Hannover, Germany
  E-mail address: schuett@math.uni-hannover.de
  URL: http://www.iag.uni-hannover.de/~schuett/

  Department of Mathematics, Rikkyo University, Tokyo 171-8501, Japan
  E-mail address: shioda@rikkyo.ac.jp
  URL: http://www.rkmath.rikkyo.ac.jp/math/shioda/

  Research Institute, for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-
8502, Japan
  E-mail address: shioda@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp
